Singapore's Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MFA) said it condemns the attacks on Jakarta, where a suicide bomber was suspected to be responsible for at least one of the multiple blasts that shook the Indonesian capital earlier on Thursday.

SINGAPORE'S Ministry of Foreign Affairs (MFA) said it condemns the attacks on Jakarta, where a suicide bomber was suspected to be responsible for at least one of the multiple blasts that shook the Indonesian capital earlier on Thursday.

"MFA is deeply shocked to learn of the multiple explosions in Jakarta targeted at innocent civilians. We condemn these attacks and express our condolences to the families of the victims. We support the Indonesian government in its efforts to bring those responsible to justice," MFA said.

It added that the Singapore Embassy in Jakarta is contacting the registered Singaporeans in the city to ascertain their safety, and is in close contact with the Indonesian authorities. "We will continue to monitor the situation closely," MFA said.

According to various media reports from Jakarta, a series of bomb blasts have killed at least four people in the city. Video from one scene showed at least one attacker detonating a suicide vest near a shopping centre, exploding as he approaches the building.

sentifi.com Market voices on:

Indonesian media has reported that three suicide bombers targeted a Starbucks cafe in the shopping centre, while two gunmen attacked a nearby police post, triggering a gunfight. There are also reports of a fresh explosion at the scene after about 25 police converged on the building.

Singaporeans are advised to be vigilant and take the necessary precautions. Singaporeans who require consular assistance while in Jakarta can contact the Singapore Embassy there or the 24-hour MFA Duty Office at:

Embassy of the Republic of Singapore in Jakarta

Tel: + 62-21 299 504 00

Duty handphone: +62 811863348

Email: singemb_jkt@mfa.sg

MFA Duty Office

Tel: +65 6379 8800/8855 (24-hour hotline)

Email: mfa_duty_officer@mfa.gov.sg