DUBLIN--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Research and Markets (http://www.researchandmarkets.com/research/hdgvj5/kaolin_market) has announced the addition of the "Kaolin Market Analysis By Application (Paper, Ceramics, Paint, Fiberglass and Rubber) And Segment Forecasts To 2020" report to their offering.

Global Kaolin Market is expected to reach USD 5.88 billion by 2020. Growth of construction sector on account of industrialization in emerging economies including China, Brazil, India and Russia is expected to drive kaolin market demand. Kaolin is used in ceramics and concrete to increase whiteness and brightness of the base material. Growing focus on superior aesthetics would drive demand for ceramic tiles and sanitary ware resulting in increased kaolin demand over the forecast period. Moreover, increasing demand for paper packaging is anticipated to drive kaolin demand, as the mineral enhances durability and reinforcement properties of the base material.

Paper was the largest application segment for the kaolin market accounting for over 40% of volume share in 2013. Ceramics is expected to be the fastest growing application segment at a CAGR of 4.4% from 2014 to 2020.

Rising concern regarding environment protection is expected to drive demand for eco-friendly packaging materials such as paper, which would aid kaolin market growth over the forecast period. Asia Pacific was the largest kaolin market with revenue exceeding USD 1.5 billion in 2013. Construction industry growth in India, China and Indonesia is expected to have a positive impact on the market.

Companies Mentioned:

Thiele Kaolin

Imerys SA

I-Minerals Inc

Quarzwerke GmbH

SCR-Sibelco NV

KaMin LLC

BASF SE

LB Minerals Ltd

Kaolin AD

Ukrainian Kaolin Company

Report Structure:

1 Executive Summary

2 Kaolin Industry Outlook

3 Kaolin Application Outlook

4 Kaolin Regional Outlook

5 Competitive Landscape

6 Methodology & Scope

For more information visit http://www.researchandmarkets.com/research/hdgvj5/kaolin_market