BENSALEM, Pa.--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Law Offices of Howard G. Smith reminds investors of the upcoming March 28, 2016 deadline to file a lead plaintiff motion in the class action filed on behalf of investors who purchased Freeport-McMoRan Inc. (“Freeport-McMoRan” or the “Company”) (NYSE: FCX) securities between February 27, 2015 and January 15, 2016, inclusive (the “Class Period”). Investors who suffered losses of $1,000,000 or more on their investment in Freeport-McMoRan securities are encouraged to contact the Law Offices of Howard G. Smith to discuss their legal rights.

On January 19, 2016, following an investigation concerning allegations of corruption and bribery between the Company and government officials to secure lucrative mining rights, the chief executive officer of the Company’s Indonesian unit, Maroef Sjamsuddin, stepped down. This news came less than a month after the chairman of Freeport-McMoRan resigned allegedly due to similar charges. Following these news reports, shares of the Company’s stock fell in value, thereby damaging investors.

The complaint alleges that throughout the Class Period, defendants made materially false and misleading statements and/or failed to disclose that: (1) Sjamsuddin had discussions with senior officials in the Indonesian government about bribing Indonesian government officials in return for an extension of Freeport-McMoRan’s right to operate in the country; (2) that Freeport-McMoRan had violated the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act (“FCPA”); and (3) as a result of the foregoing, Freeport-McMoRan’s public statements were materially false and misleading at all relevant times.

If you purchased Freeport-McMoRan shares, you may move the Court no later than March 28, 2016 to request appointment as lead plaintiff. To be a member of the class you need not take any action at this time; you may retain counsel of your choice or take no action and remain an absent member of the Class. If you wish to learn more about this action, or if you have any questions concerning this announcement or your rights or interests with respect to these matters, please contact Howard G. Smith, Esquire, of Law Offices of Howard G. Smith, 3070 Bristol Pike, Suite 112, Bensalem, Pennsylvania 19020 by telephone at (215) 638-4847, toll-free at (888) 638-4847, or by email to howardsmith@howardsmithlaw.com, or visit our website at http://www.howardsmithlaw.com.

This press release may be considered Attorney Advertising in some jurisdictions under the applicable law and ethical rules.