FRIMLEY, England--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Genesys (www.genesys.com/uk), the market leader in omnichannel customer experience (CX) and contact centre solutions, announced dates and locations of the 2016 G-Summit roadshows, a series of global educational and networking events which help companies and organisations create and deliver exceptional customer experiences.

Focused on building “next generation customer relationships,” the G-Summit series will demonstrate the capabilities of the award-winning, industry-recognised Genesys Customer Experience Platform and share best practices for companies and organisations to better connect with consumers and the people they serve to build loyalty and drive better business and operational performance.

The events will reach over 5,000 thought leaders, industry experts, and Genesys partners and customers in over 30 cities in five continents. Take a look at the G-Summit lineup and register today.

Genesys customers and partners will learn how to differentiate and optimise their customer experiences. The forums will touch on a wide array of topics, including:

Creating and managing personalised customer journeys

Managing workloads for better management of operational costs, workforce efficiency and customer satisfaction

Empowering contact centre agents to deliver exceptional customer experiences through conversation analytics as well as leveraging the Genesys Omnichannel Desktop

“G-Summit events present unique opportunities to meet with industry experts and the technical leaders behind the Genesys Customer Experience Platform and discover the competitive advantages that can be delivered through exceptional customer experiences,” said Paul Maguire, Vice President of UK and Ireland at Genesys. “Our global forums will better equip customers and partners with the knowledge they need to transform their customer experience operations, as well as demonstrate to the industry our world-class omnichannel capabilities.”

Held from April through November, the workshops debuted in Dubai and will wrap up in Jakarta, with stops in: New York City, Seattle, Dallas, Pittsburgh, Cleveland, Columbus, Ottawa, Toronto, Mexico City, São Paolo, Colombia, Paris, London, Königswinter (Germany), Athens, Bangkok, Shanghai, Hanoi, Ho Chi Minh City, Singapore, Kuala Lumpur, Tokyo, Osaka, Wellington, Sydney and Tel Aviv.

The one-day events will culminate with Genesys G-Force Miami in October, the industry’s leading customer experience global conference where CX luminaries, Genesys experts, customers and partners, together with leading industry analysts and global business leaders, will share best practices and collaborate on leveraging Genesys solutions to create exceptional omnichannel customer experiences, journeys and relationships.

G-Summit registration is limited. For more information and to stay updated on additional cities added to the schedule, visit the Genesys G-Summit events page and follow the conversations on @Genesys and #Gsummit16.

About Genesys

Genesys, the world’s #1 Customer Experience Platform, empowers companies to create exceptional omnichannel experiences, journeys and relationships. For over 25 years, we have put the customer at the centre of all we do, and we passionately believe that great customer engagement drives great business outcomes. Genesys is trusted by over 4,700 customers in 120 countries, to orchestrate over 24 billion contact centre interactions per year in the cloud and on premises. For more information www.genesys.com/uk.

Connect with Genesys via Twitter, Facebook, YouTube, LinkedIn, and the Genesys Blog.