LONDON--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Technavio analysts forecast the school assessment tools market in APAC to grow at a CAGR of more than 17% during the forecast period, according to their latest report.

The research study covers the present scenario and growth prospects of the global school assessment tools market in APAC for 2016-2020. The report also lists elementary and secondary education as the two end-user segments with the secondary education segment accounting for over 71% of the market share in 2015.

Technavio education analysts highlight the following three factors that are contributing to the growth of the school assessment tools market in APAC:

Increased participation of private players

Rise in number of schools with IB programs

Extended emphasis on STEM education

Increased participation of private players

The education industry in APAC is observing increasing penetration of private players who are helping schools upgrade their education infrastructure. These vendors are assisting schools resolve issues related to teacher training, building and improving ICT infrastructure, and procuring education hardware through partnerships and collaborations.

“Schools are approaching vendors, catering to the education sector, to understand the needs of advanced education delivery system to develop customized solutions that are suitable for their students and budget,” says Jhansi Mary, a lead analyst at Technavio for education technology research. For instance, the Teachers’ Association of the Republic of Indonesia (PGRI) signed a memorandum of understanding with PT-Telekomunikasi Indonesia and Intel Indonesia Corporation in 2014. Through this, teachers in 69 districts in Indonesia are able to access ICT-based teaching facilities, including assessment of students and curricula formation. Furthermore, in India, vendors like Educomp and Next Education provide innovative school assessment solutions targeted at specific grades.

Rise in number of schools with IB programs

The International Baccalaureate (IB), which is a non-profit education foundation, offers educational programs that are challenging and high in quality. Students enrolled in schools that follow the IB program are subject to continuous internal and external assessment, which include both formative and summative assessment methods.

Within APAC, the IB supports close to 600 schools across 30 countries and territories. Apart from best-in-class curriculum, these programs also focus on implementing international standards in student assessment and evaluations. Owing to these benefits, governments in countries like China, Malaysia, and Japan, are collaborating with IB to increase the adoption of this curriculum at the national level.

Extended emphasis on STEM education

The teaching of STEM subjects is being considered as a strategic step to empower students in these fields. Various countries in APAC such as Malaysia and Japan are encouraging students to take up careers, degree programs, and apprenticeships in STEM subjects as they realize the employment prospects in this field.

As most of the governments in APAC are focusing on improving the number of STEM graduates, assessment tools implemented in schools will play an important role in meeting this objective. At a granular level, it is essential to have assessment methods in place. This implementation will help educators and students identify their strengths and weaknesses in every subject.

Assessment tools focus on helping students in achieving success in their chosen field through a series of assessments. Parameters such as assimilation, interpretation, categorization, data handling, observation, and computational skills are honed using these tools. While schools are including STEM subjects as an essential part of their course curricula, they are also bringing about changes in their assessment framework as well. “In order to tap into this opportunity, vendors of school assessment tools are increasing their presence in APAC,” says Jhansi.

Browse Related Reports:

Do you need a report on a market in a specific geographical cluster or country but can’t find what you’re looking for? Don’t worry, Technavio also takes client requests. Please contact enquiry@technavio.com with your requirements and our analysts will be happy to create a customized report just for you.

About Technavio

Technavio is a leading global technology research and advisory company. The company develops over 2000 pieces of research every year, covering more than 500 technologies across 80 countries. Technavio has about 300 analysts globally who specialize in customized consulting and business research assignments across the latest leading edge technologies.

Technavio analysts employ primary as well as secondary research techniques to ascertain the size and vendor landscape in a range of markets. Analysts obtain information using a combination of bottom-up and top-down approaches, besides using in-house market modeling tools and proprietary databases. They corroborate this data with the data obtained from various market participants and stakeholders across the value chain, including vendors, service providers, distributors, re-sellers, and end-users.

If you are interested in more information, please contact our media team at media@technavio.com.