Regions which will clock a jump in travel to Singapore during race week vis-a-vis the week before include East Asia (104 per cent), Western Europe (19 per cent) and Oceania (46 per cent).

Singapore

DESPITE Brexit, the United Kingdom is expected to be one of the biggest source markets for race fans in this year's Singapore Grand Prix from Sept 16-18, according to a report by travel data marketing firm Sojern.

"There is continued interest from the UK to travel to Singapore for the event," said Russell Young, managing director (Asia Pacific) of Sojern. "In terms of outbound travel from the UK, we have noted a 41 per cent week-on-week increase for travel to Singapore for the week leading up to the Singapore Grand Prix."

On the other hand, Brexit has fuelled general travel interest to the UK, with interest spiking from various parts of the world, including the Asia Pacific, he noted.

sentifi.com Market voices on:

The report showed that the number of Singapore Grand Prix race-goers from the Middle East is expected to drop by 63 per cent during race week compared to the previous week as more travellers will be coming in early September during Eid al-Adha (The Festival of Sacrifice).

Other regions which will clock a jump in travel to Singapore during race week vis-a-vis the week before include East Asia (104 per cent), Western Europe (19 per cent) and Oceania (46 per cent).

Countries likely to register a decline in visitors to Singapore vis-a-vis the week prior include Indonesia (-33 per cent) and India (-13 per cent).

"Marketing to Grand Prix tourists means knowing how their behaviour differs," Sojern highlighted in the report, suggesting the travel industry focus ad spend on the UK. It added: "Consider offering more 'fifth night free' deals in order to capitalise on travellers looking for a long weekend."

For instance, 65 per cent more travellers are expected in Singapore for four- to five-day trips during race week compared to the week prior. The most popular date of arrival is September 15.

The Singapore Grand Prix heads into its ninth year this year, while the city-state is presently slated to remain a host venue until 2017.

The Singapore Tourism Board estimates that incremental tourism receipts from race weekend typically hits some S$150 million annually, with over 40 per cent of travellers coming from overseas.