JAKARTA, Indonesia--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Westin Hotels & Resorts, part of Starwood Hotels & Resorts Worldwide, Inc. (NYSE:HOT) today announced the opening of The Westin Jakarta, marking the first Westin hotel in Jakarta. Owned by PT. Wahana Nusantara a part of Gama Corporation, the opening of the hotel is set to bring the Westin brand’s inspired and innovative wellness initiatives to the capital city of Indonesia.

“We are extremely proud to extend Westin’s global reach into Jakarta,” said Brian Povinelli, Global Brand Leader, Westin Hotels & Resorts. “The design, spectacular views, food and beverage offerings and amenities will bring to life the brand’s commitment to guests’ well-being through a local lens.”

“We are thrilled to debut the Westin brand to Indonesia’s capital,” said Vincent Ong, Senior Director, Brand Management, Starwood Hotels & Resorts Asia Pacific. “With the brand’s focus on the bringing the pillars of well-being to life and commitment to ensure our guests leave feeling better than they first arrive, we are confident the opening of the hotel will resonate strongly with the local Jakarta community and guests visiting from around the world.”

Slated to be the highest hotel in Indonesia, The Westin Jakarta occupies floors 50 to 69 of the mixed-used Gama Tower, boasting 272 well-appointed guestrooms and suites with uninterrupted views of the city. Designed by Hirsch Bedner Associates (HBA), one of the world’s leading hospitality interior design firms, the hotel’s interior design was inspired by natural, organic forms and textures that interpret the landscape and are translated throughout the hotel through dynamic patterns and materials. Illustrated through the chandeliers and artwork, the hotel’s contemporary design features contextual elements, including traditional Indonesian motifs and Ikat patterns in the metal screens.

“The Westin Jakarta will provide a restorative retreat in the heart of the bustling city with genuine service complemented with the Westin signature well-being offerings that will fuel and energize our guests’ every move,” Arun Kumar, General Manager, The Westin Jakarta, adds.

To amplify the guest experience, four unique dining venues serve a variety of culinary options alongside the brand’s nutrient-rich and delicious SuperFoodsRx® menus. Seasonal Tastes®, the all-day dining restaurant, presents buffet and a la carte options featuring local and international cuisine with 7 live cooking stations. Guests can also enjoy nutritious treats and a gourmet cup of coffee on the go Daily TreatsSM. Set to be a game-changer for Jakarta dining scene is Henshin, perched on the top three floors of the building, the restaurant features Nikkei Cuisine with Japanese-Peruvian Flavors prepared by a specialty chefs as well as a rooftop alfresco bar featuring Crafted at Westin™ program, the brand’s signature beverage program that features a fresh selection of expertly mixed cocktails infused with natural ingredients and local flavors.

With the brand’s mission to be a partner in their guests’ well-being, The Westin Jakarta features an idyllic spa as well as a WestinWORKOUT® fitness studio boasting state-of-the-art exercise equipment from world-class brands in an open, airy and well-designed space. The hotel will also offer the Westin Gear Lending program in partnership with New Balance®, allowing guests to pack light and stay fit with New Balance shoes and clothing for guests to use during their stay.

The Westin Jakarta also features a banquet area perched on the top few levels of the hotel with a 200 guest capacity with breathtaking 360 degree sweeping views of Jakarta city. For events and weddings, the hotel offers 3,000 square meters of function rooms including the Java Ballroom on the Ground floor with a maximum capacity 1,500 guests.

The Westin Jakarta is situated strategically in Kuningan central business district, 45 minutes by car from the International Soekarno-Hatta Airport, an ideal location for business travelers. Guest can enjoy nearby shopping malls as well as the Jakarta iconic National Monument as a destination for tourists.

For more information, please visit www.westin.com/jakarta.

About Westin Hotels & Resorts

Westin Hotels & Resorts, a leader in wellness and hospitality for more than a decade, lives its philosophy “For a Better You™” through the Westin Well-being Movement’s six pillars: Feel Well, Work Well, Move Well, Eat Well, Sleep Well and Play Well. At more than 200 hotels and resorts in nearly 40 countries and territories, guests can experience offerings that include the iconic Heavenly® Bed, RunWESTIN™ and Westin Gear Lending with New Balance®, delicious and nutritious SuperFoodsRx®, the innovative workspace Tangent®, Westin Weekend signature experiences, and Heavenly BathSM and Heavenly Spa®. Westin is proud to offer Starwood Preferred Guest®, the industry’s leading loyalty program. To learn more, visit www.starwoodhotels.com/westin. Stay connected to Westin: @westin on Twitter and Instagram and facebook.com/Westin.