Singapore Airlines (SIA) said on Wednesday it will launch a new route in November to link Jakarta with Sydney, and also increase the frequency of its Singapore-Jakarta flights with eight new weekly services.

SINGAPORE Airlines (SIA) said on Wednesday it will launch a new route in November to link Jakarta with Sydney, and also increase the frequency of its Singapore-Jakarta flights with eight new weekly services.

The carrier said the new route and services will be introduced on Nov 23 and operated with Boeing 777 aircraft. They are subject to regulatory approval.

The flights will be made available for sale on a progressive basis through the various distribution channels.

The Singapore-Jakarta-Sydney route will be served three times a week - on Mondays, Wednesdays and Fridays - said SIA. The flights will depart Singapore at 8.15pm and arrive in Jakarta at 9pm. Onward flights from Jakarta will depart at 10.25pm and arrive in Sydney at 9.30am the next day.

sentifi.com Market voices on:

Return flights from Sydney will operate on Tuesdays, Thursdays and Saturdays. They will depart Sydney at 11am and arrive in Jakarta at 2.35pm, and depart Jakarta at 3.35pm and arrive in Singapore at 6.10pm.

In addition, SIA will be injecting eight new weekly flights between Singapore and Jakarta. Four will depart Singapore on Mondays, Wednesdays, Fridays and Sundays at 1.50pm and arrive in Jakarta at 2.35pm, with return flights departing Jakarta at 3.35pm and arriving in Singapore at 6.10pm.

The four other flights will depart Singapore on Tuesdays, Thursdays, Saturdays and Sundays at 8.15pm and arrive in Jakarta at 9pm local time, with return flights departing Jakarta at 10.25pm and arriving in Singapore at 1.10am the following day.

Singapore-Jakarta is the busiest route in SIA's network in terms of flight frequency, with 63 weekly round-trip services, or nine flights per day.

With the additional services, SIA will operate 71 round-trip flights per week between Singapore and Jakarta. Together with the three flights that will operate on a Singapore-Jakarta-Sydney route, Jakarta will be served with 74 weekly flights.

Sydney is also a major destination in SIA's route network with 31 weekly flights to and from Singapore, the carrier said. The new services via Jakarta will increase the number of weekly Sydney flights to 34.