Global research and advisory firm Universum has released its ranking of the most attractive employers in the APAC region. Universum surveyed 117,000 business students from the region's nine leading economies — including China, Australia, and New Zealand — and asked them to rank the companies they dream of working for. Perhaps unsurprisingly, Google took the top spot, while other entries like McKinsey & Company are less expected. Despite not appearing in the same ranking for European students, Apple placed second. The "Big Four" audit firms — KPMG, Deloitte, Ernst & Young, and PwC — all made the list. Slides View As: One Page

14. Unilever Unilever owns over 400 companies and employs roughly 170,000 people. The consumer goods company is run from Rotterdam, Netherlands, and London, United Kingdom. Its products include food, beverages, cleaning agents and personal care products.

13. J.P. Morgan With annual revenue nearing $100 billion and a legacy dating back to 1799, J.P. Morgan is one of the most established banks in the world. The firm has enjoyed a heavy presence in Asia, particularly in China, for the past 95 years.

12. The Boston Consulting Group (BCG) In South East Asia alone, BCG boasts more than 200 consulting staff across five offices in Bangkok, Ho Chi Minh City, Jakarta, Kuala Lumpur and Singapore.

11. Microsoft Employees find the company very flexible — in the US, more than 40% reported being able to work from home, according to PayScale. The computer-tech stalwart has one of the strongest reputations of any organisation in the world.

10. KPMG KPMG is a global network of professional firms specialising in audit, tax and advisory services, employing more than 170,000 people. Along with PwC, Ernst & Young, and Deloitte, KPMG makes up the "Big Four" audit firms.

9. L'Oreal Group L'Oréal is the world's largest cosmetics company and is headquartered in Clichy, Hauts-de-Seine with a registered office in Paris. The 107-year-old organisation had a total revenue of more than £22 billion in 2015. Universum lauded its communications with young people, particularly via social media. "L’Oréal, has one of the finest multi-channel approaches we have ever seen," Tattanelli told us. "LinkedIn, Facebook, Instagram and others are all used to deliver a variety of messages that describe their culture and reveal what it’s really like to work for L’Oréal."

8. Deloitte This New York City-based "Big Four" accounting firm is also the world's second-largest professional services network, and is a go-to destination for thousands of graduates.

7. PricewaterhouseCooper It's no wonder so many business undergraduates dream of working for PwC. Vault Accounting 50 has ranked it as the most prestigious accounting firm in the world for seven consecutive years. It has operations in 157 countries, 756 locations, with more than 208,000 people. Claudia Tattanelli, Global Director at Universum told Business Insider via email: "At each touch point of the onboarding experience, from engaging with recruiters, giving on-campus presentations, to the career fairs and interviews throughout their internship experiences, PwC's efforts are top notch and impeccably executed."

6. Ernst & Young Ernst & Young is headquartered in London, United Kingdom. The firm dates back to 1849 with the founding of Harding & Pullein in England. The current firm was formed by a merger of Ernst & Whinney and Arthur Young & Co. in 1989 and now has more than 210,000 employees in 700 offices around the world.

5. Proctor & Gamble Proctor & Gamble may be best known to most people for their powerful advertising campaigns during the Olympics, but they're the name behind some of the world's most recognisable brands including Ariel, Oral B, and Head & Shoulders. 8% of the company's net sales worldwide come from the Asia Pacific region according to a report from the Singaporean government, and P&G is currently pushing further into the Asian markets.

4. Goldman Sachs Goldman Sachs specialises in global investment banking and other financial services and is headquartered in Lower Manhattan but has branches throughout the world. The bank employs roughly 34,000 globally.

3. McKinsey & Company Many of McKinsey's alumni have gone onto great things. More current and former Fortune 500 CEOs are alumni of McKinsey than of any other company — including Google CEO Sundar Pichai, Facebook's Sheryl Sandberg, and Morgan Stanley CEO James P. Gorman. Universum’s head of research for APAC said: "In essence McKinsey and Co is seen as a prestigious employer who, if you manage to get in with them, almost guarantee you a successful and prosperous future career, even long after you’ve moved on."

2. Apple Since being founded in 1976, Apple has established itself as the most valuable company in the world and has become known for its cult-like following. Despite long hours of hard work, many Apple employees seem to think the pros outweigh the cons. Employee perks include good salaries, discount on Apple products, beer bashes, and delicious food.