Additional 7,500 hectares of smallholder land on track for RSPO certification in 2017

Cargill’s PT. Poliplant Sejahtera (PSA) oil palm plantation in West Kalimantan was recently awarded the Roundtable on Sustainable Palm Oil (RSPO) certification. PSA’s mill and estate operations are the first under Poliplant Group to be RSPO certified. Carqill’s acquisition of Poliplant Group in 2014 comprises five plantations of approximately 50,000 hectares of planted company and smallholder land.

The certification covers PSA’s Siriham mill operations and 4,005 hectares of associated inti (company-owned) estates. In addition, 7,500 hectares of smallholder land, managed by seven cooperatives under the government’s PIR-Trans (transmigration) program, is on track to be in PSA’s RSPO certification in 2017. Upon certification, Cargill will be able to purchase sustainably produced and RSPO certified fresh fruit bunches from these smallholders.

John Hartmann, chief executive officer, Cargill Tropical Palm Holdings Pte Ltd, said,“The well-being of the neighboring village communities, our employees and the environment are most important to Cargill. We continuously strive to protect that sanctity by respecting rights, valuing relationships, and operating responsibly in all of our oil palm plantations. The RSPO certification is a testament of our commitment to this responsibility and to achieving our broader goal of a fully sustainable and transparent palm oil supply chain globally.”

Smallholder farmers also play a critical role in meeting the increasing global demand for sustainable palm oil. PSA is currently supporting independent smallholders from Kundangan Manis Cooperative through the RSPO procedures for new plantings. The well-established procedures ensure responsible planting of oil palm and the protection of areas of high conservation value and with high carbon stocks.

Anthony Yeow, president director of Cargill’s Poliplant Group, said “We continue to work closely with smallholders to help them improve the quality of their crops and maximize yields. With RSPO certification, they can contribute to improving the livelihoods of their families and the people in their local communities.”

PSA’s RSPO certification is Cargill’s fourth, after the first received by PT. Hindoli (South Sumatra) in 2009, PT. Harapan Sawit Lestari (West Kalimantan) in 2014 and PT. Indo Sawit Kekal (West Kalimantan) in 2015. Cargill is currently working towards RSPO certification for its remaining estates and mills at Poliplant Group.