Climate change is already resulting in a huge number of consequences globally, from rising sea levels to record-breaking high temperatures.

It’s also endangering some of the most popular and delicious foods on the planet.

With the hotter weather and more frequent natural disasters that come with deviation from Earth’s natural cycles, foods from avocado to lobster are in trouble.

Here are seven foods and drinks that could grow more expensive and eventually disappear due to climate change.

Avocados

source Rob Ludacer

There are many reasons why avocados are more expensive now than ever before, including a farmers’ strike. But the biggest threats to avocados are rooted in environmental issues linked to climate change: hot weather and droughts have caused problems everywhere from California to Australia. Avocados are weather-sensitive and slow growing – making them especially susceptible to the effects of climate change.

Coffee

source Pixabay

In September, a report from the nonprofit Climate Institute concluded that the area around the world fit for coffee production would decrease by 50% due to climate change. In addition to dealing with drought, climate change has made coffee crops more vulnerable to diseases like coffee rust, which have wiped out more than a billion dollars in crops.

Beer

Warmer and more extreme weather is hurting hops production in the US, reports ClimateWatch Magazine.

And droughts could mean less tasty drinks. Some brewers fear that a shortage of river water may force them to brew with groundwater – a change that the head brewer at Lagunitas said “would be like brewing with Alka-Seltzer,” according to NPR.

Oysters

Right now, climate change is actually helping oysters, as they grow faster in warmer waters. However, warmer waters also make oysters more susceptible to oyster drills, reports Seeker, citing a recent study in Functional Ecology.

Drills are snails that attack and eat oysters. They’re already a multi-million dollar problem for the oyster industry that could get worse thanks to warming water temperatures.

Maple syrup

Climate change is already shifting maple syrup tapping season and impacting the quality of syrup, according to Climate Central. Southern producers fear that eventually, areas like Virginia won’t get cold enough for maple syrup production, even during the chilliest time of the year.

Chocolate

Indonesia and Ghana, which have historically had ideal climates for growing cocoa beans, are already seeing decreased yields of cocoa. Chocolate companies, like Mars, have hired meteorologists to study the impact of changing weather patterns and attempt to reduce damage.

“If climate conditions in these growing areas begin to change over time, it may influence both the supply and quality available of an ingredient that we use in our products,” Katie Johnson, a senior manager on the commercial applied research team, told Business Insider in September. “Anticipating what the climate will be like 10, 20, or even 100 years from now is difficult, though the better we can understand what the different climate scenarios and risks to our supply chain are, the more prepared we can be in the future.”

Lobsters

source Ivana Lalicki/Shutterstock

If ocean waters increase more than five degrees, baby lobsters may not be able to survive, according to research by the University of Maine Darling Marine Center and Bigelow Laboratory for Ocean Sciences, the Guardian reported.

The United Nations’ Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change has said that the Gulf of Maine will reach that temperature by 2100. In other words, Maine’s lobsters could go from a more than $330 million business to extinct in 84 years.