OLDWICK, N.J.--(BUSINESS WIRE)--In this A.M.BestTV episode, Evelina Pietruschka, secretary general of the ASEAN Insurance Council, outlines discussions set for this month in Yogyakarta, Indonesia, as members of the Southeast Asia insurance community move closer to integrating markets. Click on http://www.ambest.com/v.asp?v=asean1116 to view the entire program.

The second annual ASEAN Insurance Council Summit will take place on Nov. 23, 2016. The main goal of the summit is to re-position the insurance sector so that it can become stronger and help develop the economy of the ASEAN countries.

Pietruschka said a goal of the summit is to achieve discussions between regulators and the private sector, which will include top executives and decision makers for the insurance sector in the ASEAN region. Pietruschka also pointed out that these discussions, “hope to address all the issues and changes in regulations concerning the growth of the insurance sector.”

In order to achieve the maximum benefit from these discussions, Pietruschka said the summit will focus on, Marine, Aviation and Transportation (MAT) matters, the level of education in the insurance sector, addressing the infrastructure gap among the countries in the region, as well as financing and micro-insurance.

Pietruschka acknowledged that the challenge for the ASEAN region involves very low levels of insurance penetration, “but growth potential is very high.”

Recent episodes of A.M.BestTV include:

A.M. Best Analytics: Workers' Compensation Line Delivers Strong Profit Despite Falling Rates : A.M. Best ’s Gordon McLean, senior financial analyst, and Connor Brach, associate analyst, said the U.S. workers’ compensation insurance sector posted a combined ratio of 96.0 in 2015, the fifth year in a row of underwriting profits: http://www.ambest.com/v.asp?v=workerscomp1016.

: ’s Gordon McLean, senior financial analyst, and Connor Brach, associate analyst, said the U.S. workers’ compensation insurance sector posted a combined ratio of 96.0 in 2015, the fifth year in a row of underwriting profits: http://www.ambest.com/v.asp?v=workerscomp1016. U.S. Presidential Election Could Impact ACA, International Trade, Regulation : Insurance leaders say the upcoming U.S. presidential election could affect health care, global business and antitrust exemptions: http://www.ambest.com/v.asp?v=platforms1116.

: Insurance leaders say the upcoming U.S. presidential election could affect health care, global business and antitrust exemptions: http://www.ambest.com/v.asp?v=platforms1116. Indonesian Reinsurance Markets Brace for Impact of Rules Changes : At the 22nd Annual Indonesia Rendez-vous in Bali, insurers said recent rule changes that direct a large share of Indonesia's reinsurance premium inside the country mean local reinsurers must underwrite prudently and be able to handle claims in a crisis: http://www.ambest.com/v.asp?v=aprvs11016nc.

: At the 22nd Annual Indonesia Rendez-vous in Bali, insurers said recent rule changes that direct a large share of Indonesia's reinsurance premium inside the country mean local reinsurers must underwrite prudently and be able to handle claims in a crisis: http://www.ambest.com/v.asp?v=aprvs11016nc. Positive News in Housing Market Helps Bolster U.S. Title Sector: A.M. Best’s Stephen Ruane, senior financial analyst, and Connor Brach, associate analyst, said that while title insurers’ loss and expense ratios dipped in 2015, surplus grew 3.9%, more than doubling the prior-year growth: http://www.ambest.com/v.asp?v=title1016.

A.M.BestTV covers exclusive A.M. Best information and reports, targeted topics and key developments in the (re)insurance industry every Monday, Wednesday and Friday. Sign up for alerts of episodes at http://www.ambest.com/multimedia/ambtvsignup.html. View A.M.BestTV episodes at http://www.ambest.tv.

A.M. Best is the world’s oldest and most authoritative insurance rating and information source. For more information, visit www.ambest.com.

Copyright © 2016 by A.M. Best Company, Inc. and/or its subsidiaries. ALL RIGHTS RESERVED.