Under Indonesia's 2011 currency law, Bank Indonesia can retract any rupiah note from circulation at any time but the law also requires the central bank to replace it with a currency note of the same face value. There is also a 10 year grace period to exchange old currency with the new, the law says.

Mirza's comment came after Indian Prime Minister Narendra Modi scrapped 500 rupee and 1,000 rupee (about $7 and $15) notes — which made up more than 80 percent of the currency in circulation — on Nov. 8 in a bid to flush out tax evaders and corruptors.

The Prime Minister gave Indians until Dec. 30 to exchange the high denomination currency or to deposit them in bank accounts. There is also a grace period until March 31 next year to exchange bank notes but one will need to file a declaration with the central bank to do so.

Since the unexpected announcement, millions of city dwellers have queued in front of banks and ATMs to withdraw cash.

Meanwhile, Reuters reported that many of India's 260 million farmers have no bank account and depend on local moneylenders to fund sowing, exposing them to the impact of Modi's latest policy.

India's cash dependent economy and the lack of income tax revenue are the culprit behind such brouhaha, which forms part of Modi's campaign promise in tackling tax evasion and corruption.

The country's government publish earlier this year that only 1 percent of the 1.3 billion population paid income tax in 2013. Many of them stored their tax-free cash outside the system, hence the "black money" tag.

Indonesia, nearly 9,000-kilometers away from India, is facing a similar problem with corruption and tax evasion. President Joko "Jokowi" Widodo said he knows some Indonesians who keep Rp 1 trillion ($75 million) in cash "under their mattresses," in order to avoid government tracking of their wealth.

Indonesia currently ranks 41st most competitive economy — which slipped four places from a year earlier — out of 138 countries in the world, according to the World Economic Forum's Global Competitiveness Report 2016-2017.

The report noted that corruption is the most problematic factors for doing business in Indonesia.

According to Hestu Yoga Saksama, the director of counseling, service and public relations at the Indonesian Tax Office, there were about 30 million registered individual taxpayers out of Indonesia's 250 million population, 19 million of which must file their tax report while only 12 million who did in 2015.

Despite the low participation, a recent report from a joint study by the World Bank and PricewaterhouseCoopers (PwC) titled Paying Taxes 2017 lauded Indonesia's tax reform. Indonesia ranks 104 out of 190 countries, up from 160 from 189 countries in the previous report on the back of simpler tax audit and less complicated tax deduction process.

With additional reporting by Reuters.