"It will be followed-up with self-improvement measures in the Directorate General of Taxes to gain people's trust and become an institution with integrity."

Hestu encouraged anyone who had been asked for illegal fees by a tax officer to call the tax office whistle blowing hotline number 1-500-200 or e-mail at pengaduan@pajak.go.id.

Handang and Nair were arrested in a sting operation on Monday with $148,500 in their possession. Nair allegedly promised a total of $445,000 in bribes to Handang to fix E.K. Prima's $5.7 million back taxes.

E.K. Prima is a local division of Lulu Group, according to the company website. It deals with exports and imports of a wide range of merchandise, from cocoa, coal and paper to garments, textiles and building materials. The company also holds "Sesame Street" and "Harry Potter" licenses for children's apparel.

Vicious Cycle

Yustinus Prastowo, the executive director of the local policy think tank, Center for Indonesia Taxation Analysis, or CITA, said that the tax authorities still needs to radically improve the integrity, accountability and professionalism of institution.

"A thorough evaluation of internal surveillance is needed," he said.

"That includes employment management which covers the recruitment process, mutation, promotion, distribution of tasks, function, identification of strategic positions that are prone to corruption and ethical proficiency for officials," he said.

The vicious cycle of businessmen asking for a tax reduction will continue unless the tax system becomes transparent, less complicated and provides more reasonable tariffs, according to Hariyadi Sukamdani of the Indonesian Employers Association, or Apindo.

Responding to the arrest, Finance Minister Sri Mulyani Indrawati also commented on the matter on her Instagram account.

Tulisan ini saya buat tadi malam sekitar pukul 23.00 , walaupun ada kejadian yang mengecewakan kita semua, saya ingin agar segenap jajaran Kementerian Keuangan tetap berdiri tegar, menatap dengan percaya diri, bahwa kita mampu membangun Kementerian Keuangan yang dapat dipercaya dan dibanggakan oleh rakyat dan bangsa Indonesia. Karena saya percaya bahwa sebagian besar jajaran dan pegawai Kemenkeu adalah mereka yang jujur dan berintegritas tinggi. Mereka yang tidak lelah mencintai Indonesia dengan terus setia berbuat baik dengan membangun negara kita menjadi negara yang maju, adil dan bermartabat. A photo posted by Sri Mulyani Indrawati (@smindrawati) on Nov 22, 2016 at 1:39pm PST

"I believe most of the Finance Ministry's high-ranking bureaucrats and employees are honest people with high integrity," she said in a hand-written note. "Together we can fight against corruption!" she said.

Still, businessmen call for a more comprehensive clean up of the system, instead of addressing the issue of bribery alone.