TAINAN, Taiwan--(BUSINESS WIRE)--A special training program on creative policy making is currently hosted by National Cheng Kung University (NCKU), Tainan, Taiwan, to facilitate the upgrade process of small and medium enterprises, and cultural creative industries in Indonesia with an Indonesian delegation of city officials, according to the university Nov. 24.

Led by Singkawang city mayor Drs. Awang Ishak, the sixteen-member delegation comprises Palangka Raya vice Mayor Dr. Mofit Saptono Subagio, heads of local agencies and faculty from the University of Gadjah Mada (UGM).

Working with the professors and design thinking facilitators in the four-day training program, the delegation will explore the possibilities in developing city branding for their cities and learn more about Taiwan especially Tainan’s business, cultural creative industries, agriculture and tourism while improving their local competitiveness.

NCKU Executive Vice President Tung-Yang Chen on behalf of President Huey-Jen Jenny Su welcomed the delegation on the opening day Nov. 23 and commented that this program will serve as a policy-making platform for regional development based upon both design thinking and business insight.

NCKU C-Hub CEO Dr. Shuenn-Ren Liou, chairman of the Institute of Creative Industries Design, gave a welcome speech on enhancing competiveness through triple helix.

Singkawang city mayor Awang said that he is very happy to finally visit Tainan because there are a lot of people from Singkawang now living in Tainan.

Awang also mentioned that he wants to learn more about how to develop small and medium enterprises and to help Singkawang build an advanced economy.

Co-organized by UGM and NCKU, the program is very important for Indonesian local government to explore international experience in city reform and policy making, according to Dr. Erwan Agus Purwanto, dean of the Faculty and Social and Political Sciences in UGM.

Dr. Erwan said, “Learning from Taiwan’s experience, Indonesia has some similar background and would like to become an industrial country by following Taiwan’s footsteps.”

During the four-day workshop, the delegation will learn about strategies on upgrading small and medium enterprises, urban development and local competitiveness, and policies for promoting creative industry.

NCKU has been working with the Tainan city government and local industries to boost regional innovation and develop creative industries in the region.