(Reuters) - U.S.-based miner Freeport-McMoRan Inc reported weaker-than-expected fourth-quarter earnings on Wednesday and warned that it may need to cut output and jobs at its mine in Indonesia if it can't secure a permit to export copper concentrates.

Shares of Freeport, the world's biggest publicly-listed copper miner, fell almost 5 percent in early trading in New York.

Freeport said it informed Indonesian authorities it will need to slash production at its Grasberg copper and gold mine to about 40 percent of capacity if it does not have the export approval permit, which, according to the company, had not been received as of Wednesday.

It said it would also need to reduce costs at the mine in Indonesia's Papua province and suspend future investments on underground development projects and at its new smelter.

Freeport's exports of copper concentrate from Indonesia have been halted since Jan. 12 when a ban on shipping semi-processed ore out of the Southeast Asian country came into effect.

Under new mining sector rules introduced on the same day, Freeport and some other firms could be allowed to resume exports if they agree to switch their current 'contracts of work' to so-called 'special mining permits,' a move that could result in higher taxes.

For each month of delay in obtaining approval to export, the Indonesian operations' share of production is forecast to be reduced by about 70 million pounds of copper and 100,000 ounces of gold, Freeport said in a statement accompanying its results.

A Freeport spokesman said earlier on Wednesday the company expected to resume exports from Indonesia "soon."

Freeport's shares were down 4.7 percent at $16.21 at the open before paring losses to trade at $16.39.

Earlier on Wednesday, the Phoenix, Arizona-based company reported net income of $292 million, or 21 cents per share, in the quarter ended Dec. 31, compared with a loss of $4.08 billion, or $3.47 per share, a year earlier.

Excluding items, Freeport earned 25 cents per share, well below analysts' average estimate of 34 cents per share, mostly due to lower output from the Grasberg mine.

"They had a pretty big miss mainly on Grasberg," Clarksons Platou Securities analyst Jeremy Sussman said.

"This is the third big miss in a row. What feels different now is that there are more questions than answers regarding Indonesia," he said.

Looking ahead, Freeport said it expected to sell about 4.1 billion pounds of copper this year, down from 4.65 billion pounds in 2016. Gold sales were expected to double to 2.2 million ounces.

(Reporting by Nicole Mordant in Vancouver. Additional reporting by John Benny in Bengaluru; Editing by Ted Kerr and Paul Simao)