LONDON — US President Donald Trump may still make a speech in Parliament even if House Speaker John Bercow acts on his pledge to ban him from addressing Westminster Hall, the Lord Speaker has said.

A spokesperson for the Lord Speaker, Lord Fowler, confirmed on Tuesday evening that the would be "open" to inviting Trump to speak in the royal gallery, a prestigious Parliamentary venue that is separate from Westminster Hall.

Lord Fowler's spokesperson told the Guardian: "The Royal Gallery might be a possibility. The Royal Gallery is a prestigious venue and has hosted guests in the past including President Reagan."

Bercow made a memorable speech to MPs on Monday in which he announced his intention to ban the President from speaking to MPs and Lords in Westminster Hall as part of his state visit to Britain later this year.

Several previous Presidents have addressed British parliamentarians in Westminster Hall when making state visits to Britain. The last US President to do so was Barack Obama.

Bercow, who as House of Commons Speaker has the authority to decide which foreign leaders will speak in Westminister Hall, said on Monday that this is an "earned honour" that Trump does not deserve, particularly in light of his ban on people from seven majority-Muslim countries from entering the US for 90 days.

Bercow said: "...as far as this place [the House of Commons] is concerned, I feel very strongly that our opposition to racism and to sexism and our support for equality before the law and an independent judiciary are hugely important considerations in the House of Commons."

Bercow has less influence over who speaks in the Royal Gallery, however. This means that Trump could still yet address MPs and Lords when he visits Britain, despite Bercow's extraordinary intervention.

Lord Fowler, who as a House of Lords chair has the power to invite or block figures from speaking in the Royal Gallery, indicated that he may be happy for Trump to make a speech there if it he decides that it is appropriate, sources close to him said.

Bercow's memorable speech received a round of applause from most MPs present in the Commons and was lauded by the likes of Labour leader Jeremy Corbyn and Liberal Democrats leader Tim Farron. The latter said: "Trump should be under no illusion. We are snubbing him."

However, the Commons Speaker faced accusations of hypocrisy over the list of controversial world leaders that he has welcomed to Parliament in years gone by. This list includes Chinese President who Bercow said it was his "pleasure" to welcome in 2015 despite China's wide-ranging human rights abuses, plus the leaders of Kuwait, Indonesia and Singapore. Bercow's supporters point out that these leaders didn't speak in Westminster Hall.

Conservative MP Nadhim Zahawi said that Bercow had opened "himself up to hypocrisy" and noted that many MPs were unhappy to see President Xi address Parliament in 2015.

Downing Street says it looks forward to welcoming Trump later this year.