But local businesses noticed that the two candidates have yet to explain how they plan to go about achieving these goals. This has also raised uncertainty over their business plans.

"Potential investors who want to develop properties, or other investors who are just about to enter the city, are waiting. They wait for stability," Jakarta Chamber of Commerce deputy chairman Sarman Simanjorang told the Jakarta Globe on Thursday (16/02).

"The bottom line is we [businesses] still don't grasp the [candidates'] real programs on the economy. It needs to be more detailed. Hopefully, in the second round, the debates will focus more sharply on their programs," Sarman said.

Ahok came into the race with solid credentials after reforming the city's bureaucracy and fighting corruption.

In 2015, under his leadership, Jakarta's One-Door Integrated Services Agency (BPTSP) became operational. The agency can process 66 types of permits in just one day, compared with between two and 14 days previously. This helped reduce the time required to start a new business in the capital to 22 days last year, from 45 days in 2012, according to World Bank's 2017 Ease of Doing Business Report.

Sarman said there is still room for improvement, but neither Ahok, nor Anies proposed any workable programs, such as offering an online licensing process.

"Businessmen should no longer need to queue at a counter to ask for a license. Information technology means [licensing] can be accessible from anywhere," he said.

Ahok promises to revitalize traditional markets, open modern markets, provide training and soft loans to small merchants. He also promises to establish a transparent system of cooperation between the regional government and private companies.

In the other hand, Anies promises to create 200,000 new entrepreneurs in the next five years and open hawker centers in Jakarta. He also promises to start straining urban farmers to ensure a sustainable food supply.

As the race between Ahok and Anies tightens, entrepreneurs are betting on a future leader who has policies that are favorable to business.

"Whoever is chosen [as governor] should have pro-business policies," Sarman said.

He added that his colleagues do not care who wins the election, as long as that person has the ability to spur economic growth in Jakarta, with its potential as a city of service.

Sarman said the new governor has homework to improve the city's economy, which has been growing below 6 percent over the past three years.

Central Statistics Agency (BPS) data show that Jakarta's economy grew by 5.85 percent in 2016 and 5.89 percent a year earlier.

"The chosen governor must create a conducive business environment, including maintaining political stability and security by working with stakeholders such as the police, local government officials and the Indonesian Military [TNI]," said Eric Alexander Sugandi, chief economist at the SKHA Institute for Global Competitiveness (SIGC).

He said the new governor should focus on infrastructure and the building of public facilities; improving the capacity of the city's workers, as well as providing incentives for businesses, such as reducing complicated regulations.

Bank Danamon Indonesia economist Dian Ayu Yustina meanwhile said she expects the economic condition to remain stable and favorable despite potential for political tension in the run-up to the second round of the election

"We expect the market to react neutral on the outcome of the second round," she said in a note on Thursday.