Conergy, one of world’s leading solar energy service providers, today announced that it has successfully completed and connected to the grid the first utility-scale solar Photovoltaic (PV) power plant in Sumba Island, East Nusa Tenggara province.

This solar facility has a 1-megawatt installed capacity and was built in cooperation with PT. Buana Energi Surya Persada. The Sumba plant is Conergy’s first utility-scale project in Indonesia.

Construction of the solar plant began in September 2016 and was completed last month, with a total investment of USD 2.2 million (IDR 28 billion).

The new solar plant will generate more than 1400 MWh of electricity per year and is expected to provide power to more than 11,600 households in the Sumba area. The energy produced by the solar plant will be sold to PLN through a long-term power purchase agreement and will supplement the existing electricity supply in the area.

The Sumba plant will also offset the production of up to 920 tons of greenhouse gas emissions annually, the equivalent of avoiding emissions from at least 250 vehicles per year.

“Sumba is one of the regions which holds massive solar power potential, since the area receives sunlight at an average of 5 kWh / m / day and radiation of 1,000 watts / m throughout 5 hours every day.

Through our investment in the solar power facilities that we have built with full support from Conergy, we want to show the world how great is the potential of solar energy in Indonesia, andat the same time giving a meaningful contribution to improving the quality of life of people in this area,” said Rico Syah Alam, President and CEO of PT. Energi Surya Buana Persada.

Alexander Lenz, President, Conergy APAC said, “Indonesia is a large country blessed with abundant sources of renewable energy. Harnessing these resources will contribute to build the country’s energy supplies, will diversify the energy mix and will facilitate the growth and development of the economy. We are delighted that through this project, we will be able to contribute to the government’s efforts in realizing 35,000 MW in power capacity across Indonesia.”

“This Sumba project marks our first utility-scale solar project in Indonesia and further advances our position as one of the leaders for solar energy in South East Asia. Large scale solar energy has now become even more competitive than traditional energy generation sources which has enabled us to provide the local community with safe, reliable and affordable clean electricity,” added Hendrik Bohne, VP for EPC for Conergy APAC.

About PT Buana Energy Surya Persada

PT Buana Energi Surya Persada is one of first companies engaged as a solar Photovoltaic Independent Power Producer in Indonesia.The company specializes in consulting, project development and finance for small to utility-scale solar power.

The company is privately-held and is majority-owned by Jakarta-based Multi Buana Group which deals with heavy equipment & infrastructure, laboratory & medical equipment and sustainable investments.

About Conergy

Conergy is one of the world’s largest downstream solar companies — specializing in the development, design, finance, build and long-term asset management of commercial, industrial and utility-scale solar power systems. Founded in 1998, the company has pioneered the expansion of solar globally and has built over 1.5 GW across six continents. Within Asia Pacific, Conergy has closed over 460 MWp of EPC contracts and has provided Operations & Maintenance services for over 400 MWp of solar projects.