The long-awaited reboot of the original "Planet Earth" has finally arrived: BBC America's "Planet Earth II" just premiered in the US. The massive production crew traveled to 40 countries for 117 shoots, utilizing new technology like drones and low-light 4K cameras to capture animal behaviors. But nature is unpredictable — and in the quest for up-close, immersive footage, those crews had to endure some hair-raising encounters with animals and weather. INSIDER spoke with the some of the show's producers to learn more about what happened behind the scenes. Here's a look at each producer's most harrowing experiences in the wild. Slides View As: One Page

The crew camped out in penguin poop. The series kicks off with the "Islands" episode, produced by Dr. Elizabeth White. White and her crew traveled to the remote Zavodovski Island to film the world's largest penguin colony. "Many remote island animals are quite naive," White told INSIDER. "They have not evolved in close contact with humans and are often unafraid of them." That was quite true of the penguins, who frequently waddled over to inspect the crew's campsite and relieve themselves all over the tents and camera gear. Penguin poop wasn't the only obstacle the crew faced — here's the terrifying journey they endured just to reach the island in the first place.

A Komodo dragon hid inside a bathroom. Komodo dragons grow as long as ten feet — and they're known to attack humans. Luckily, the "Islands" crew only had one close encounter with the giant reptiles. "One night [the crew] came back to the rangers station, where they were storing some gear, and found a dragon in the bathroom!" White said. "The team had to tempt it out of the bathroom using a bit of old meat but the dragon left a 'calling card' (a huge dragon dropping) in the middle of the floor!" Watch a video of the bathroom-dwelling dragon right here.

"Blood sucker" bugs dropped out of the trees and snuck into the crew's clothes during production of the "Mountains" episode. "There was this horrible bug called a chupasangra, or 'blood sucker,'" producer Justin Anderson told INSIDER. "They would drop out of the trees onto the floor and sneak into our clothing to hide out until we were asleep. We tried to keep a look out for them but I woke up one day to find one in my tent and when I squashed it, it was full of blood. I'm not squeamish around any animals but these characters were pretty squirm-inducing to be around."

They also had major car trouble while filming golden eagles in the Alps. "Our crew van went crazy," Anderson said. "The rev counter went ballistic and there was thick black smoke pouring out of the exhaust and engine. Even when we switched off and took the keys it carried on. We had to run for it but decided to go back inside to rescue our camera and lenses. The engine eventually exploded — the bonnet flying open and oil spraying out. We were left standing by the side of the road!" (Here's how Anderson's team captured footage of mountain-dwelling snow leopards — some of the most elusive creatures on earth.)

Deadly spiders and snakes hung out near these eerie, glowing mushrooms. "In the place where we filmed the fungi and beetles we came very close to two deadly animals," "Jungles" episode producer Dr. Emma Napper told INSIDER. "Hiding under the fungi we found Brazilian wandering spiders." (They're one of the world's most venomous bugs.) "And one evening after crouching down in the undergrowth for a few hours next to a patch of fungi, I got up [...] and out slithered a 60-centimeter long coral snake!" she continued. "One bite can kill! Luckily we all stayed calm, including the snake, and backed away with no harm done."

Seriously: Deadly snakes lurked everywhere. "We came across snakes a few times," Napper said. "It's always a little scary as you don’t tend to see them until you are nearly treading on them, and of course many of them are deadly. I felt very sorry for the cameraman who beautifully shot the glass frogs and shared the pond he was standing in with a fer-de-lance!" (That's another name for a large and deadly viper species responsible for about 50% of all snakebites.)

A freak hailstorm started knocking down trees in the jungle. Napper and her crew spent 6 weeks in a flooded Brazilian jungle searching for an elusive species of river dolphin. One day a hail storm swept in out of nowhere, breaking the motor on their boat and knocking down trees. Not even the locally-based guides had seen anything like it. But the harrowing storm eventually passed, and the river dolphins finally revealed themselves. "All we knew was that they were somewhere in hundreds of kilometers of impenetrable flooded forest," Napper said. "After six weeks or so we only had about 15 minutes of footage of them! But it was enough to make the sequence."

Spiders and rats started eating clothes. Sensing a theme here? Earth's jungles are positively teeming with bugs and snakes. In Brazil, the "Jungles" crew once had to share a single room that was overrun with spiders — they even started getting into everyone's clothes, despite the protection of mosquito netting. Napper even said that a rat ate through her underwear.

Constant jungle rainstorms spawned swarms of mosquitoes. "The biggest challenge was the weather," Napper said of her time filming the "Jungles" episode. "Cameras don't like rain and it rains all the time [...] And that brings out the bugs, too. On jaguar [shoots] we had to sit still on the river bank in clouds of mosquitoes." And in case all that wasn't enough, they were also beset by crocodilian creatures known as caiman. "[On the jaguar shoot] the caiman would hang around the boat and slowly get closer and closer," Napper said. "One of them ended up right under us."

Members of the "Deserts" crew stood inside a swarm of one billion locusts in Madagascar. "Being inside a swarm was, bizarrely, an incredible experience," "Deserts" producer Ed Charles told INSIDER. "Certainly before I went on the shoot I had lots of friends and family freaking out on my behalf, wondering how on earth I could be in a swarm of locusts, but it was never something that bothered me. However, I wasn't prepared for how amazing it was to be inside a swarm. The locusts don't hit you or fly into you — instead they part like a stream around a rock, flying within a few inches of you. Also, the sound made by so many billions of wings all beating in unison was incredible, like a deep roar of a waterfall, but almost on the edge of hearing."

In Africa, the "Grasslands" crew faced angry hippos. "The most squeamish experience while filming 'Grasslands' was in the Okavango Delta when our little boat got stuck in swamp grass," episode producer Dr. Chadden Hunter told INSIDER. "Not a big problem in itself, but we soon noticed we were surrounded by grumpy hippopotamus. 'Don't get too close to them,' warned my local cameraman. 'Hippos kill more people in Africa than any other animal, and they snapped my last boat in half!'