Development of the facility, which offers, among others, a workshop area, café, library, meeting rooms, communal office space and computers, started in November last year. The facilities are available for use by eligible entrepreneurs at a subsidized cost to allow them to meet with partners and clients, collaborate on ideas and plans, and grow their marketing networks.

Ahok, who is a businessman-turned-politician, said apart from offering a co-working space, the hub – only accessible to people holding Jakarta identity cards – will also offer entrepreneurship training, including craftsmanship training, supported by experts and players in the creative industry.

Governor Basuki 'Ahok' Tjahaja Purnama, right, and recently appointed Creative Economy Agency (Bekraf) chairman Triawan Munaf, second from right, at the inauguration of the Jakarta Creative Hub at Graha Niaga Thamrin on Wednesday (01/03). (JG Photo/Yudha Baskoro)

Other than that, the Jakarta government also offers a financing scheme to fund budding entrepreneurs, where they get to keep 80 percent of their profit from the business, while the city administration takes the remainder to fund hub.

“This is for the youths, the creative minds who would like to start a business. Therefore, this is not only a gathering place for communities, (but the hub) also provides tools and co-office spaces,” Ahok said on Wednesday.

“Creative minds, once they developed a product, they would start a company. We will help to patent the product, build the company, and lend them subsidized office here. There are 12 rooms here. If the program goes well, we will build another one, including offices. We will also offer a funding with 80% profit sharing for the creator and 20% for the administration,” he added.

Veronika Tan, chairwoman of the Jakarta chapter of the National Handicraft Council (Dekranasda), said she expects this facility to positively inspire the capital's youth, while the Jakarta government can leverage the skills of talented young people who wish to become entrepreneurs, but who may be constrained by hurdles such as capital, office space, ideas and access to marketing.

"The way it will work, is just like when we grant a scholarship. Those qualifying for it must be the smart and committed ones," said Veronica, who is also Ahok's wife.

Leonard Theosabrata, a consultant involved in the establishment of the Jakarta Creative Hub, said it is expected to become self-financing in the future. "We don't want to rely on funding from the Jakarta administration," he said.

After Wednesday's inauguration, the hub will put hold an open house to welcome guests to inspect the facilities, submit their proposals to use it and register.

He said the hub is intended to create new entrepreneurs and help shape the ideas and business plans of young businesspeople before they submit funding proposals.

Watch more on Indonesia Highlights 8pm tonight at JG News Channel or tune in to our FB live