Asia is full of opportunities for every kind of traveler — especially the adventurous traveler looking to go where most other travelers haven't been. Luxury Asia tour operator Remote Lands provided us with some hidden gems across the continent that are still unknown to many tourists. From an ancient tropical rainforest in Malaysia to a prehistoric city in South Korea, here are 12 must-see spots. Slides View As: One Page

Raja Ampat Islands, Indonesia You'll want to dive straight into the jewel-toned water that surrounds Indonesia's jungle-covered Raja Ampat islands. If you're adventurous, go for a swim with whale sharks in Cenderawasih Bay Marine Park, or explore caves and ancient rock paintings on Misool Island. Plant lovers can head to Waigeo Island, the home of the bird of paradise.

Gyeongju, South Korea Although it's only a few hours from Seoul on the bullet train, Gyeongju is a city that will make you feel as though you've stepped back in time. The coastal city was first settled by humans in the prehistoric period, and then served as the capital of the Silla dynasty for 1,000 years. It's no wonder then that the city boasts the most pagodas, temples, palace ruins, and tombs in all of South Korea. The beautiful 8th century Bulhuksa temple is one such example and a site you won't want to miss.

Yala, Sri Lanka The array of wildlife you'll encounter in Yala National Park is impressive to say the least. The park has one of the largest populations of leopards in the world, as well as peacocks, crocodiles, sloth bears, and elephants. The landscape itself is also incredibly diverse; you'll make your way through grasslands, rainforests, and beaches. History buffs won't want to miss the Buddhist monastery of Sithulpawwa, a more than 2,000 year-old temple that was once home to Sri Lankan kings.

Ladakh, India The Tibetan Buddhist monasteries of Ladakh are built directly into the Indian Himalayas, which is what makes this region so breathtaking — not to mention that some of the locals still wear traditional dress. Go between the months of October and March, and you might be lucky enough to run into a majestic snow leopard.

Kamchatka, Russia Kamchatka is best described as a wonderland of geysers, hot springs, and volcanoes. The 1,250-mile peninsula in the Russian Far East is home to the Valley of the Geysers, which is part of a UNESCO world heritage site and boasts 20 geysers alone. Visitors are almost guaranteed a bear sighting, considering the region has the highest concentration of brown bears in the world.

Taipei, Taiwan Taipei may not be as popular as other large Asian cities like Tokyo or Beijing, but that doesn't mean it's any less exciting. Some of the country's best street food can be found in Taipei's multiple night markets or just outside of the city in Jiufen, a former mining village nestled into the mountains. Experience the country's culture at the National Palace Museum or the National Revolutionary Martyr's Shrine, or get outdoorsy with a trip to the Yangmingshan National Park or Beitou Hot Spring.

Danum Valley, Malaysia Nestled into the Malaysian Borneo, the Danum Valley is an ancient tropical rainforest that only a select few travelers know about and manage to visit, thanks to the area's strict conservation rules. If you do manage to make the trip, you'll be able to watch for animals such as orangutans, clouded leopards, and Asian elephants, all while strolling through the trees' canopies on an elevated pathway.

Matsuyama, Japan The oldest hot spring in Japan is located in Matsuyama, and is a favorite spot among locals. The bathhouse, known as Dōgo Onsen Honkan, dates back to the 1800s, and remains a great example of the traditional architecture popular during that time period. Another nearby must-see is the castle of Matsuyama-jō. Located on top of Mount Katsuyama, it provides great views of the city and harbor.

Tajikistan City dwellers will find plenty to do in Dushanbe, Tajikistan's largest city and capital, which is quickly turning into a modern metropolis. For those who prefer the outdoors, the Pamir Mountains — often referred to as the "roof of the world" provide the ultimate hiking experience. Hikers should be sure to stop at Iskanderkul, a glacial mountain lake whose crystal clear waters are stunningly reflective.

Mrauk U, Myanmar You'll have to wake up early to experience the true beauty of Mrauk U; sunrise is when the fog starts to burn off and reveal ancient pagodas surrounded by lush green hills. The pagodas are some of the oldest in Myanmar, and most haven't been restored, which makes them all the more authentic and intriguing. The best way to get to Mrauk U is a two-hour boat ride from Sittwe along the Kaladan River.

Macau, China Most people know Macau as a gambling Mecca, but as it turns out, there's much more to the city than its nickname, the Vegas of China, would suggest. The region dates back to the 16th century, and was originally a Portuguese colony, which is why visitors will sense both Asian and European influences while visiting. Chinese temples mix with the ruins of the 17th-century Church of St. Paul and the bustling Rua da Tercena, a well-known street market that offers antiques and art. For unparalleled views of the city, climb the Macau Tower.