JAKARTA, Indonesia--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Powerphase and PT Perusahaan Listrik Negara (PLN), the state power company of Indonesia, have signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU) today. The MoU was signed by PLN and Powerphase in conjunction with USA Vice President Pence’s visit to Indonesia. With this agreement, both parties agree to cooperate on a phased implementation plan of Turbophase® Dry Air Injection, beginning with a feasibility study and including two 50 MW projects, followed by a full implementation of 2 GW of additional power. The 2 GW is forecasted to be contracted and installed at existing PLN assets over the next two years.

Indonesia’s economy is enjoying rapid GDP growth spurred by a population of more than 250 million, including a large and growing middle class. As Indonesia’s population experiences more urbanization and industrialization, demand for electric power increases. PLN, the state power company, has moved quickly to address that need by creating an economic framework conducive to investment in the power sector. Companies like USA-based Powerphase are bringing innovative solutions to Indonesia to rapidly meet the demand.

Powerphase has more than 100 patents pending globally around its dry-air injection technology for combustion turbines, called Turbophase®. By deploying the Turbophase® system in Indonesia, the country will realize more output and efficiency from its existing power plants. “One of the key benefits of the Turbophase® system is how fast it can be deployed,” said Bob Kraft President & CEO of Powerphase. Kraft continued, “We are excited to bring our technology to the people of Indonesia and we thank the U.S. Commercial Service for their assistance in helping us work with PLN and the government of Indonesia.”

The roll-out of the Turbophase® system in Indonesia will use cutting-edge technology nearly all from USA-based companies like Powerphase including engines from Caterpillar, control systems from General Electric, instrumentation from Emerson and valves from Bray. By facilitating introductions for USA-based companies like these and others, the U.S. Commercial Service is realizing its mission of creating prosperity through global trade. The project will create jobs both in the USA and Indonesia as individual implementations are rolled out country-wide.

The full implementation project will create annual savings of more than 2 million tonnes of C02, the equivalent of taking more than 400,000 cars off the road. The total project value is estimated at US$ 80 Million for phase 1 and US$ 1.6 Billion for the full scale. Powerphase has offered PLN a full turnkey approach including financing. The total project implementation will save Indonesia US$11.6 Billion over the 20-year operational term.

About Powerphase:

Powerphase is a global leader in combustion turbine technologies with more than 100 patents pending. By focusing on combustion turbine air efficiency, Powerphase has been able to unlock previously untapped potential from combustion turbine power plants, cost-effectively improving output, fuel efficiency, flexibility and performance. Powerphase is based in the United States of America with global headquarters in Jupiter, Florida USA and regional offices in Denver, Colorado, USA and Dubai, United Arab Emirates and Singapore.