Ms Djanuwati discussed the importance of sustainability and how it has shaped the development of Axalta’s high performance coating solutions at Universitas Indonesia campus talk. (Photo: Business Wire)

Ms Djanuwati discussed the importance of sustainability and how it has shaped the development of Axalta’s high performance coating solutions at Universitas Indonesia campus talk. (Photo: Business Wire)

DEPOK, Indonesia--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Axalta Coating Systems (NYSE: AXTA), a leading global supplier of liquid and powder coatings, recently presented a campus talk at Universitas Indonesia, one of the leading universities in Indonesia. University speaking platforms provide a way for Axalta’s executives to share industry expertise with students and faculty in the science, technology, engineering and math (STEM) disciplines. Ms. Dewi Djanuwati, Managing Director of Axalta Coating Systems in Indonesia, discussed the importance of sustainability and how it has shaped the development of Axalta’s high-performance coating solutions.

Attended by a group of enthusiastic students and faculty members from the Department of Metallurgy & Materials Engineering, the event was designed to build awareness about sustainability goals in the coatings industry, with a special emphasis on the reduction of volatile organic compounds (VOCs) emissions which has been linked to improved air quality.

“Sustainability is central to Axalta’s business and an important consideration in the on-going growth of our markets such as Indonesia. As a responsible corporate citizen, we are committed to promoting awareness about sustainability, especially to students who will become our industry’s stakeholders in the future”, said Ms. Djanuwati.

Ms. Djanuwati spoke about Axalta’s commitment to the development of environmentally responsible coatings that are designed to serve the sustainability goals of its customers. Axalta’s high performance coatings not only help customers’ products to last longer, but they also enable customer operations to run more efficiently, providing ways to save energy, reduce waste, and be more productive. Axalta has also formulated customized low VOC liquid and virtually zero VOC powder coating products to meet specific customer needs for durability, weathering, abrasion, chemical or corrosion resistance, and excellent finish in a wide range of colors and textures.

“We encourage our students to learn from practitioners to enrich their understanding, and to build the connection between what they learn in the classroom and the reality of the industry. Today’s presentation enlightens us about the latest technology in the coating industry and how Axalta contributes to sustainable coating solutions,” said Dr. Mochamad Chalid, M.Sc.Eng, Polymer (Product) Technology - Department of Metallurgy & Materials Engineering, Universitas Indonesia.

About Axalta Coating Systems

Axalta is a leading global company focused solely on coatings and providing customers with innovative, colorful, beautiful and sustainable solutions. From light OEM vehicles, commercial vehicles and refinish applications to electric motors, buildings and pipelines, our coatings are designed to prevent corrosion, increase productivity and enable the materials we coat to last longer. With more than 150 years of experience in the coatings industry, the approximately 13,000 people of Axalta continue to find ways to serve our more than 100,000 customers in 130 countries better every day with the finest coatings, application systems and technology. For more information, visit axalta.com and follow us @Axalta on Twitter and on LinkedIn.