NORCROSS, Ga.--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Guided Therapeutics, Inc. (OTCQB: GTHP), developer of the LuViva® Advanced Cervical Scan, a non-invasive device used to detect cervical disease instantly at the point of care, today announced it has received an order for 10 additional LuViva® Advanced Cervical Scans for Indonesia.

The order brings to 24 the number of LuVivas and more than 7,000 the number of single use Cervical Guides sold to Indonesia. Additional orders of Cervical Guides are expected later this year.

LuViva has been recommended as an alternative to the Pap test by doctors presenting at the 22nd Annual Scientific Meeting of the Society of Obstetricians and Gynecologists of Indonesia.

“Indonesia is an important market for LuViva where it has demonstrated its value as an alternative to lab–based testing with the benefits of an immediate result and no painful tissue sample,” said Gene Cartwright, CEO and President of Guided Therapeutics, Inc. “In areas were the laboratory infrastructure is limited, LuViva presents a tremendous improvement in women’s access to healthcare.”

Cervical cancer is the second most common malignancy among women of Indonesia with an incidence rate of about 17 in 100,000. In Indonesia, where 70% of cervical cancer cases diagnosed are in an advanced stage, there is a clear unmet need to increase screening to detect cervical disease before it develops into cancer.

In Indonesia, more than 93 million women are at risk of developing cervical cancer. Less than 25% of women aged 30 to 50 are screened for cervical cancer in Indonesia with the primary method of visual inspection with acetic acid.

There are about 2.6 billion women aged 15 years and older who are at risk of developing cervical cancer worldwide. The world market for cervical cancer screening and diagnostics, as currently practiced using cytology (Pap test) for primary screening, is estimated at $6 billion and is projected to grow to almost $9 billion by 2020.

About Guided Therapeutics

Guided Therapeutics, Inc. (OTCQB: GTHP) is the maker of a rapid and painless testing platform based on its patented biophotonic technology that utilizes light for the early detection of disease at the cellular level. The Company’s first product is the LuViva® Advanced Cervical Scan, a non-invasive device used to detect cervical disease instantly and at the point of care. In a multi-center clinical trial with women at risk for cervical disease, the technology was able to detect cervical cancer up to two years earlier than conventional modalities, according to published reports. For more information, visit: www.guidedinc.com.

The Guided Therapeutics LuViva® Advanced Cervical Scan is an investigational device and is limited by federal law to investigational use in the U.S. LuViva, the wave logo and "Early detection, better outcomes" are registered trademarks owned by Guided Therapeutics, Inc.

Forward-Looking Statements Disclaimer: A number of the matters and subject areas discussed in this news release that are not historical or current facts deal with potential future circumstances and developments. The discussion of such matters and subject areas is qualified by the inherent risks and uncertainties surrounding future expectations generally and also may materially differ from Guided Therapeutics’ actual future experience involving any of or more of such matters and subject areas. Such risks and uncertainties include those related to the early stage of commercialization of products, the uncertainty of market acceptance of products, the uncertainty of development or effectiveness of distribution channels, the intense competition in the medical device industry, the sufficiency of capital raised in prior financings and the ability to realize their expected benefits, the uncertainty of future capital to develop products or continue as a going concern, the uncertainty of regulatory approval of products, and the dependence on licensed intellectual property, as well as those that are more fully described from time to time under the heading “Risk Factors” in Guided Therapeutics’ reports filed with the SEC, including Guided Therapeutics’ Annual Report on Form 10-K for the fiscal year ended December 31, 2016 and subsequent filings.