DUBLIN--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Research and Markets has announced the addition of the "Coal in India 2017 - A Comprehensive Analysis on Trends & Outlook of Coal Sector" report to their offering.

India is the world's third largest energy consumer, and its energy use is projected to grow at a rapid pace supported by economic development, urbanization, improved electricity access and an expanding manufacturing base. By 2040, India's energy consumption will be more than OECD Europe combined, and approaching that of the United States.

In India's energy sector, coal accounts for the majority of primary commercial energy supply. With the economy poised to grow at the rate of 8-10% per annum, energy requirements will also rise at a reasonable level. Coal will continue to be a dominant commercial fuel two decades from now and beyond, despite our nuclear energy programme, development of natural gas supplies, increased hydropower generation, and emphasis on renewables.

The Indian coal industry aspires to reach the 1.5 billion tonne (BT) mark by FY 2020. In fore-coming years, the industry will naturally need to focus on building on the success, and be on track for reaching the FY 2020 goal. One of the primary goals of the Government of India is to ensure that it is able to meet the country's power generation needs. Another aim is to lower the country's reliance on coal imports by boosting the coal production quickly. India imports about 25% of its coal demand, much of which comes from Indonesia.

The government expects that by 2017-19, it will not have to import coal, except to feed power plants located along the coast. Coal imports have shrunk by around 9% this year, according to the government, which is a positive trend. The success of coal block auctions carried out by the new government has proved that its decision to conduct a fair and transparent' bidding for coal mines has benefited the country in a big way. India's investment in new coal-fired generation capacity will support an increase in coal use. India has plans to almost double its production to one billion tonnes by 2020 to meet its growing requirements.

A Must Buy For:

- Coal Companies - Power Generators, Domestic Coal Producers, Captive Miners, Coal Importers, Coal Transporters, Technology Providers

- Banks, Project Financers, and Investment Bankers

- Consulting Firms

- Research and Educational Institutes

Key Topics Covered:

1. Executive Summary

2. Introduction: Electricity & Coal Market in India

3. Coal Production in India

4. Budget Plan Expenditures

5. Demand-Supply Dynamics in India

6. Coal Imports in India

7. Coal Asset Track

8. Regulatory Aspect of Coal Sector

9. Policy Initiatives and Reform Measures

10. Essentials for Augmentation of Coal Sector

11. Challenges in Coal Power Sector

12. The Way Forward for Coal Sector

13. Conclusion

For more information about this report visit https://www.researchandmarkets.com/research/xq2j4s/coal_in_india