The INSIDER Summary: Students all over the world wear uniforms to school.

Some are traditional garments connected to a country's culture.

Others are simple pleated skirts, slacks, and button-down shirts.

Uniforms may create a sense of community within the walls of a school, but they're definitely not uniform around the world. In some countries, schools require uniforms that connect to the local culture, while other institutions stick to various iterations of pleated skirts, khaki pants, and button-down shirts. Here's what school uniforms look like in 15 different countries. Slides View As: One Page

United Kingdom Pupils wearing boater hats as part of their school uniform pose for a group picture outside the V & A museum in London, England.

Somalia Somali student walk to attend classes at Bustaale Primary and Secondary school in Mogadishu.

India Young monks stand at their school inside Thiksey Monastery.

Russia Children, wearing red neckerchiefs, a symbol of the Pioneer Organization, attend a ceremony for the inauguration of 18 new members.

South Africa Children from the Rainbow-Hill Christian school wait to sing to wish former South African President Nelson Mandela well outside his house in Houghton in 2013.

Sierra Leone Kadidiatu Swaray, 18, (left) and her friend Mabinty Bangura, 15, arrive for class at the Every Nation Academy private school in Makeni.

Nepal A girl in a school uniform plays at Bashantapur Durbar Square after school in Kathmandu.

South Korea Students from a high school cheer for their seniors in front of a college entrance examination hall before the test begins.

Ukraine Schoolgirls in traditional uniforms sing Ukraine's national anthem as they attend a ceremony of the first day in school at a cadet lyceum in Kiev.

Cambodia Students hold up plastic flowers and Cambodian flags during celebrations marking the 62nd anniversary of the country's independence from France in 2015.

Indonesia High school students sign on uniforms to celebrate the ending of the four-day national exams in Medan.

China Students who live in Shenzhen line up for a school bus after school in Hong Kong before crossing the border back to mainland China.

Japan Japanese elementary school children walk together as they leave school.

Bhutan Children play during their break at Jigme Losel primary school in Thimphu.