JAKARTA, Indonesia, Aug. 15, 2017 /PRNewswire/ -- As a tangible contribution to a better Indonesia, AQUA is collaborating with Kitabisa.com to conduct the Saya Indonesia (I Am Indonesia) campaign -- which will coincide with the Independence Day of the Republic of Indonesia -- through concrete action by supporting education in Indonesia. The Saya Indonesia campaign is a celebration of goodness. Indonesians love their nation, which is apparent through their concern for the development of education. To add a festive flavor to the celebration of goodness, AQUA specially launched the 600 ml AQUA packaging with the Saya Indonesia label.

Saya Indonesia is an independent campaign initiated by AQUA which is aligned with its commitment -- not only to present the best quality products, but also to contribute to a better tomorrow for all Indonesians. Education has become an important aspect in determining a country's development; therefore, AQUA has made real contributions through its support. "AQUA aspires to support a better life, and right now, we believe it is necessary to revive the spirit of sharing kindness. Independence Day is the perfect time to promote goodness around us by supporting education," said Danone AQUA Marketing Manager Gistang Panutur.

The collaboration with Kitabisa.com is expected to strengthen the Saya Indonesia campaign to support targeted educational projects. "We are very excited and look forward to the collaboration of the Saya Indonesia campaign with AQUA. Both Kitabisa.com and AQUA are concerned about the progress of education in Indonesia. There is still so much potential in our children that should be optimized through access to proper education. However, many Indonesians still do not have access to even standard education," said Kitabisa.com Founder Alfatih Timur.

The Saya Indonesia campaign will support several projects promoted by Kitabisa.com. They are: Adik Bintang Berprestasi by Hoshizora, education development program by Yayasan Cinta Anak Bangsa, the Taman Bacaan Pelangi project in Flores, and the SOS Children's Village. Additionally, AQUA has also partnered with Alfa Group and Indomaret to support educational projects carried out by both national retailers to help Indonesians get access to proper education.

People can participate in this campaign by purchasing two Saya Indonesia edition AQUA bottles. Then, upload the image of the bottles to the Saya Indonesia page at www.SehatAQUA.com/sayaindonesia. It does not stop there. People can also invite others to celebrate kindness through similar actions to support educational projects carried out by AQUA. Every purchase of two bottles of AQUA becomes a symbol to one support of the educational project being promoted in the Saya Indonesia campaign. The more people participate in the Saya Indonesia campaign, means our support to realize a better education in Indonesia.

About AQUA

AQUA is the pioneer of Packaged Drinking Water (AMDK) in Indonesia. It was established in 1973. As a manifestation of the vision and commitment to manage social and environmental operations responsibly, AQUA developed the AQUA Lestari initiative, consisting of four pillars: Water Resources Protection, CO2 Reduction, Packaging Optimization and Garbage Collection Packaging, and Sustainable Product Distribution. AQUA is part of the DANONE group, one of the world's largest producers of food and beverage products. In Indonesia alone, DANONE's business units cover three main categories, namely Beverages (AMDK and non-carbonated soft drinks), Nutrition for Early Life (Nutricia and Sarihusada), as well as Medical Nutrition.

For more information, please contact:

Corporate Communications Department AQUA Group Tel: 021-2996-1000 E-mail: corpcomm.aqua@danone.com



Photo - https://photos.prnasia.com/prnh/20170814/1919485-1

SOURCE AQUA Group