JAKARTA, Indonesia, Aug. 30, 2017 /PRNewswire/ -- Concrete Show South East Asia: the only dedicated event for the Concrete & Construction industry in the Southeast Asian region will return for its 5th year to the Jakarta International Expo, Kemayoran, Jakarta, Indonesia from 13 to 16 September 2017. Organised by PT UBM Pameran Niaga Indonesia, Concrete Show South East Asia is designed to be the platform for all professionals in the concrete and construction industry in Indonesia and across the Southeast Asian region to network, expand their business, find solutions and to support the acceleration of infrastructure development all over Indonesia.

Construction sector, particularly in the infrastructure delivery, is an important sector in the economic development. Infrastructure is indeed one of the pillar of the national economic growth. Record from the government-statistic agency: Statistics Indonesia, in 2016 the construction sector ranked 3rd as economic growth basis in Indonesia, contributing 0.51% to the nation's economic growth after the manufacturing - process industry and trading industry. This raised the economic growth to 5.02% in 2016, comparing to the 4.88% in 2015. Observing the first quarter growth in 2017, record showed 5.01% (YoY) compared to same period in 2016. The rapid progression of construction sector makes it the biggest contributor to the national income, achieving 10.38% in the GDP or ranked 4th after industry, agriculture and trade.

Christopher Eve, President Director of PT UBM Pameran Niaga Indonesia stated,"The Indonesian government continues to focus on the development of construction and infrastructure as important push for the country's economy. By accelerating the development, it will push the growth of the economy. Indonesian construction market holds the largest among the ASEAN countries, taking up 60 – 70% of the total market in this region. Concrete construction contributes 40% of the material used in projects across Indonesia, hence the government pushes for the increase of the national industrial capacity of precast and prestressed concrete to 50% in 2019. This will create effectiveness, efficiency and quality in construction work."

Further, Christopher Eve added,"Driven by the fact that Indonesia is a highly-potential market for Construction which keeps on growing, PT UBM Pameran Niaga Indonesia brings Concrete Show South East Asia to Jakarta for the 5th time. One of the products of excellence showcased in Concrete Show South East Asia is the precast and prestressed concrete, whereby the technology for this allows the acceleration of infrastructure development in Indonesia,"

One distinguished application of precast concrete technology in Indonesia is seen in the Semanggi Interchange project. This project is expected to ease the traffic condition in the Semanggi area, the hub of business districts in Jakarta. PT Wijaya Karya Tbk, had been entrusted to execute the project, supported by the compensation fund from PT Mitra Panca Persada, a subsidiary of Mori Building Company from Japan.

Sidiq Purnomo, the Director of Engineering and System Management of PT Wijaya Karya Beton Tbk stated,"The technology utilized in the construction of Semanggi Interchange is a fine example of the progress of Indonesian construction sector. The construction method used the precast segmental girder box concrete erected with lifter strengthened by prestressed. This method is done by stringing segments of girder boxes using the prestressing forces to create an 80 meter range without column support. Each girder box is produced with ultimate precision and each one is installed in 60 – 80 minutes, without disrupting the traffic underneath the bridge. The precast technology clearly proven that it is time efficient and effective while producing an excellent quality construction results in Semanggi Interchange."

"Up to the time of this release, Concrete Show South East Asia registered the participation of around 200 exhibiting names from 23 countries and region, bringing their best products, services and technology in the precast and prestressed concrete, ready mix concrete, and contruction equipments. Local leading names to be present include Waskita Beton, Bina Barutama and more. Visitors shall also meet companies from Germany, China, Singapore, Austria, England, Korea, Japan and Italy. We are expecting 6,000 trade professionals to attend this event," said Christopher Eve.

Contact Person: Abdi Fajrin

Phone Number: +62 21 2930 5959

Email: Abdi.Fajrin@ubm.com

Photo - https://photos.prnasia.com/prnh/20170829/1929420-1-a

Logo - https://photos.prnasia.com/prnh/20170222/8521701055LOGO

SOURCE UBM Asia Ltd