LONDON--(BUSINESS WIRE)--With the rising popularity of natural ingredients in the kitchen, palm oil is one of the most produced and widely consumed vegetable oils in the world. The production and export of palm oil are also some of the most important GDP and foreign exchange contributors in many developing countries. Over the recent years, Indonesia has stood out as the largest palm oil producer and the number one palm oil exporter in the world. Many leading palm oil companies in Indonesia are now also some of the largest palm oil suppliers in the global market.

Network with over 39,000 Certified Palm Oil Suppliers in Indonesia

BizVibe is home to over 7 million companies from around the world, including many in Indonesia’s palm oil industry. In a recent article titled Global Palm Oil Industry Overview: Indonesia is in Lead, BizVibe takes a look at Indonesia’s dominance in both the production and exports of global palm oil.

BizVibe notes that the global palm oil production totaled 58.8 million tonnes in FY 2016-2017, and this figure is expected to reach 62.88 million tonnes in 2017-2018, while the market value of the global palm oil industry is expected to reach USD 92.84 billion in 2021. Indonesia has remained the world’s top producer of palm oil since 2006, accounting for over 52% of the world’s total palm oil production. Meanwhile, Indonesia is also the world’s largest palm oil exporter—In 2016, Indonesia exported over $14.4 billion worth of palm oil to the global market, representing over 51.6% of the world’s total palm oil exports in that year.

To get ahead of your competition in the global palm oil industry, forming partnerships with reliable and certified palm oil suppliers and manufacturers in Indonesia is a smart move. However, building lasting relationships with the top palm oil companies is not an easy job. That’s why many buyers and dealers are using BizVibe to network with all the leading palm oil companies or palm oil mills in Indonesia.

Connect with the Top Palm Oil Suppliers and Manufacturers in Indonesia

Connecting on BizVibe

BizVibe has been specifically designed to help industry professionals connect with like-minded businesses, providing them with a seamless, efficient, and easy-to-use platform. Using cutting-edge technology and advanced match-making algorithms, BizVibe has launched the smartest networking platform on the planet, something that can truly help companies find the right matches.

With extensive feedback from communities across multiple industries, BizVibe was able to identify the core problems and uncertainties when finding potential trade partners. Using this feedback, BizVibe developed an efficient networking platform dedicated to buyers, sellers, importers, exporters, manufacturers, and suppliers of Indonesian palm oil, helping 1000’s of users connect, engage, and make business deals daily. With the most comprehensive list of palm oil companies in Indonesia, find a new business partner today will be easier than ever.

Let the clients come to you. Add your company to the BizVibe network and get matched with like-minded businesses

About BizVibe

The single-minded focus of BizVibe’s platform is to make networking easier. Over the years, we've searched far and wide to figure out how businesses connect and enable trade. That first interaction is usually fraught with the uncertainty of finding a potential partner vs. a potential nightmare. With this in mind, we've designed a robust set of tools to help companies generate leads, shortlist prospects, network with businesses from around the world and trade seamlessly.

BizVibe is headquartered in Toronto and has offices in London, Bangalore, and Beijing. For more information on the BizVibe network, please contact us.