JAKARTA, Indonesia, Sept. 15, 2017 /PRNewswire/ -- To celebrate the ASEAN's 50th Anniversary, ASEAN PR Network and the Global Alliance of Public Relations and Communications Management will host the ASEAN PR Conference 2017 this year. This first-ever public relations conference on a global scale in Asia, will take place on the 20-23 September 2017 at The Trans Resort, Bali. Entitled "Communicating ASEAN's Global Competitivenes," the conference will sum up a road map on how PR and communications can help ASEAN earn more recognition among the global and regional communities of nations. Conference registration is underway. To register or discover more, please visit www.aseanprconference.com.

"The theme of the conference touches several key development aspects and it is our duty to ensure seamless and active participations, productive sessions, and sharing knowledge in a fun and enjoyable atmosphere," said Ermiel Thabrani, Conference Director of ASEAN PR Conference 2017.

The 3-day conference will bring up to 36 major figures across the region, including Indonesia, Singapore, China, Thailand, Malaysia, Philippines, Vietnam, and Australia. Speaker line-up as below:

H.E. Rudiantara, Minister of Communication and Information Technology ( Indonesia ), will speak from an Indonesian perspective about communicating in public sphere to remedy digital radicalism and how ICT can use Public Relations to foster public and small business startups in ASEAN.

), an Indonesian perspective about communicating in public sphere to remedy digital radicalism and how ICT can use Public Relations to foster public and small business startups in ASEAN. Tito Karnavian, National Police Chief of Indonesia , will talk about Cyber Crime Preventional Education. Educating the people to be cyber courteous and how PR and communications can help the public build cyber literacy and courtesy.

, Cyber Crime Preventional Education. Educating the people to be cyber courteous and how PR and communications can help the public build cyber literacy and courtesy. Chairul Tanjung , CEO of CT Corp and former Coordinating Minister of Economic of Indonesia , will explain PR, Media landscape in Indonesia and Business Communication Leadership.

, CEO of CT Corp and former Coordinating Minister of Economic of , PR, Media landscape in and Business Communication Leadership. Prof. Gregor Halff , Professor and Deputy Dean at Singapore Management University & Co-Chair ASEAN PR Conference Committee, will explain how association leaders sustain their associations and business.

, Professor and Deputy Dean at & Co-Chair ASEAN PR Conference Committee, how association leaders sustain their associations and business. Krishnasamy Bhavani , Managing Director International PR Training Pte Ltd, Former President of the Institute of Public Relations of Singapore and APRN Honorary Council Member ( Singapore ) will discuss the reshaping of ASEAN's image in a global community.

, Managing Director International PR Training Pte Ltd, Former President of the Institute of Public Relations of and APRN Honorary Council Member ( ) ASEAN's image in a global community. Ramon R. Osorio , Former Head Corporate Communication at ABS- CBN, Former President of Public Relations Society of The Philippines , will explain PR competencies and abilities in ASEAN and globally.

, Former Head Corporate Communication at ABS- CBN, Former President of Public Relations Society of , PR competencies and abilities in ASEAN and globally. Ma. Lourdes N. Tiquia , CEO PUBLiCUS Asia, Inc (Phillippines), will talk about political communications in ASEAN.

, CEO PUBLiCUS Asia, Inc (Phillippines), about political communications in ASEAN. Nutthaboon Pornrattanacharoen, Vice President, Academics, Thailand PR Association, will explain the refining of ASEAN brand in a global context.

ASEAN brand in a global context. Jennifer Muir , National President of the Public Relations Institute of Australia & Chief Counsel Primary Communication ( Australia ), will explain how to build a strong reputation in a competitive world.

, National President of the Public Relations Institute of & Chief Counsel Primary Communication ( ), how to build a strong reputation in a competitive world. H.E. Mr. Xu Bu -- Ambassador China to ASEAN Mission ( China ) will explain the challenges to investor relations in a rising ASEAN region.

The conference will commence with a special workshop for leaders of regional PR associations, a presentation session for research papers from the academic communities, a Welcome Reception, Gala Dinner, and Cultural Night. Around 150 top brains in the field of Public Relations and Communication will convene at the three-day event at The Trans Resort in Seminyak area. Single-day and three-day passes are available. For more information visit www.aseanprconference.com.

About ASEAN Public Relations Network (APRN):

Established in June 2014, ASEAN Public Relations Network (APRN) aims to serve as a platform to facilitate connectivity among PR leaders, PR practitioners, PR educators, PR institutions in the region, and Global Alliance for Public Relations and Communication Management the confederation of the world's major PR and communication management associations and institutions, representing 500.000 practitioners and academics around the world and 160.000 in American PR Society alone.

Based in Jakarta, Indonesia, it comprises membership of corporations, PR agencies, Communication institutions and universities, PR National Associations, and PR professionals across South East Asia.

The 1st ASEAN PR Conference (APRC) is organized to bring together international delegates to Bali-Indonesia on 20-22 September 2017, together with the celebration of ASEAN's 50th anniversary in 2017. During the event, the Regional PR conference will discuss some landmark anniversaries issues in PR, particularly on how ASEAN is engaged in the World.

With the theme "Communicating ASEAN's in Global Competitiveness," APRC will explore the ASEAN's journey towards the next milestone beyond emphasizing what are the outlooks of a diverse range of communication practitioners operating in South East Asia and how the world views ASEAN approaches to public relations theory and practice.

Click www.aseanprconference.com for more detailed information

Media Contact:

Rizka Septiana, M.Si, IAPR

Director of Membership Division

ASEAN Public Relations Network (APRN)

Sudirman Park Campus - Campus B

Jl. K.H. Mas Mansyur Kav. 35, Jakarta 10220

Hp. +62819-3223-6626

Ph. +6221-57942471

Photo - https://photos.prnasia.com/prnh/20170915/1943201-1

SOURCE ASEAN Public Relations Conference