BANDUNG, Indonesia, Sept. 20, 2017 /PRNewswire/ -- The 7th Asia International Dye Industry, Pigments and Textile Chemicals Exhibition (Interdye Asia 2017) is scheduled to take place from November 1st to 3rd, 2017 at the Trans luxury Hotel, Bandung Indonesia. The 4,000-square meter exhibition area will house 120 exhibitors from 7 countries and regions. Exhibits will include a variety of advanced environmentally-friendly dyestuffs, organic pigments, catalysts, intermediates, in addition to environmental impact assessment equipment and printing and dyeing automation technologies and materials. The exhibition will be hosted by the China Dyestuff Industry Association, the China Dyeing and Printing Association and China Council for the Promotion of International Trade, Shanghai Sub-Council and co-organized by Shanghai International Exhibition Service Co., Ltd.

In Response to China's 21st Century Maritime Silk Road strategy

Interdye Asia has, during the last six years, successfully been held in India, Turkey, Indonesia and Vietnam, and, in the course of doing so, has become the ideal communication platform for dyes and chemicals companies looking to expand into international markets, transform themselves into global brands and improve their competitiveness on the world stage.

At the 2016 G20 Hangzhou summit, Chinese and Indonesian leaders communicated their ideas on the 21st Century Maritime Silk Road initiative and the Global Maritime Axis concept, the Indonesian government's initiative to reinvigorate the country's identity as a maritime nation, placing Indonesia as one of the key trader nations along the new ocean-going trade route. The textile and garment industry, the most important industry in Indonesia, tops all others in output value, exports and employment, with an average annual growth rate of 13 per cent. Dyes and chemicals, a key component of textile production, are mainly imported into the country. China directly exports dyes to more than 130 countries and regions, among which, Indonesia consistently maintains first or second place in terms of export volume, sending 30,000 to 40,000 tons annually to the country and accounting for approximately 12 per cent of the total volume for the sector. During the 12th five-year plan period, from 2011 to 2015, China recorded an average growth rate of roughly 6 per cent in export volume of dyes to Indonesia. In addition, textile auxiliaries, organic pigments, printing pastes and inks also demonstrate great market potential in Indonesia.

Interdye - the Most Influential and Biggest Dyestuff Exhibition Brand

Under the brand of Interdye - the most influential and biggest dyestuff exhibition, Interdye Asia aims to construct a platform for textile printing companies who seek to grow their business outside of the home market. The previous success of Interdye Asia (Jakarta 2013) has accumulated great influence and reputation in Indonesia. This year, Interdye Asia locate the show in Bandung, the center of textile manufacturing, which will help the enterprises in the supply chain to meet with each other. Besides, the Indonesian Textile Association (API) has agreed to market the show at local and recruit the professional visitors for Interdye. In addition, there will be a variety of activities held along with the exhibition, such as professional forum on the dyestuff, local dyestuff factories visiting and so on.

Interdye Asia 2017 will bring together a wide range of leading exhibitors globally under one roof, including Rudolf, Yorkshire, LJ, Biotex, Runtu, Jihua and so on. Besides, there will also be one pavilion belonging to India.

For more information, please visit:

The official website of CHINA INTERDYE: www.chinainterdye.com

The official website of INTERDYE ASIA: www.interdyeasia.com

SOURCE Shanghai International Exhibition Co., Ltd.