DUBLIN--(BUSINESS WIRE)--The "Global Commercial Aircraft Piezoelectric Accelerometer Market 2017-2021" report has been added to Research and Markets' offering.

The global commercial aircraft piezoelectric accelerometer market is forecast to decline at a CAGR of 3.97% during the period 2017-2021.

The report, Global Commercial Aircraft Piezoelectric Accelerometer Market 2017-2021, has been prepared based on an in-depth market analysis with inputs from industry experts. The report covers the market landscape and its growth prospects over the coming years. The report also includes a discussion of the key vendors operating in this market.

One trend in the market is emerging nanoelectromechanical systems. Nanoelectromechanical systems (NEMS) impart electrical and mechanical functionalities on a nano-scale. Some of the devices using NEMS are sensors and accelerometers. These advanced devices are miniature forms of MEMS. NEMS devices are experiencing rising demand as they offer advantages such as higher frequency applications over MEMS.

According to the report, one driver in the market is increasing demand for newer-generation aircraft. Commercial aircraft OEMs are actively engaged in the development of new-generation aircraft that feature both reduced fuel consumption and decreased noise and carbon emission. The demand for air travel is likely to double in the next 20 years. This is due to the growth in air travel in key countries like China, India, Indonesia, Russia, and the US. The year-over-year increase in the air traffic has also essentialized the induction of new aircraft to facilitate the growing demand. The global air traffic is greatly influenced by the growing economy and rising tourism.

Key vendors

Ametek

Dytran Instruments



Meggitt

PCB Piezotronics

Other prominent vendors

APC International

Brel & Kjr

Dynaspede

Ericco International

Kistler Group

Key Topics Covered:

Part 01: Executive Summary

Part 02: Scope Of The Report

Part 03: Research Methodology

Part 04: Introduction

Part 05: Market Landscape

Part 06: Market Segmentation By Aircraft Type

Part 07: Geographical Segmentation

Part 08: Decision Framework

Part 09: Drivers And Challenges

Part 10: Market Trends

Part 11: Vendor Landscape

Part 12: Appendix

For more information about this report visit https://www.researchandmarkets.com/research/tprwbr/global_commercial