DUBLIN--(BUSINESS WIRE)--The "Global Sodium Silicate Market 2017-2021" report has been added to Research and Markets' offering.

The global sodium silicate market to grow at a CAGR of 3.02% during the period 2017-2021.

Global Sodium Silicate Market 2017-2021, has been prepared based on an in-depth market analysis with inputs from industry experts. The report covers the market landscape and its growth prospects over the coming years. The report also includes a discussion of the key vendors operating in this market.

One trend in the market is awareness about compact detergent. Compact detergents contain a homogeneous distribution of the detergent composition with sodium silicate as one of the key ingredients. Recent technology developments have led to the development of advanced processing tools and equipment, which can process and produce compact detergents with advantageous features over other types of detergents.

According to the report, one driver in the market is increasing consumption of household detergents. The detergent market accounted for a major portion of the global sodium silicate market with about 25.60% share, in 2016. Changing lifestyle, increase in disposable income, growing population, and increasing health and hygiene awareness in the consumers are the key reasons for the increased consumption of household detergents across the globe. There is a significant increase in sales of washing machines due to rapid urbanization in developing markets such as India, Bangladesh, Indonesia, and Africa. It is due to the changing lifestyles and increased disposable income.

Further, the report states that one challenge in the market is increasing use of liquid detergent. The detergent market in the US is mature. It is experiencing a shift in the consumption of the type of detergent. Several powder detergents damage the skin and clothes. They have toxic residues and lead to solid waste in sewage, which causes fouling in water transportation pipes. This is a major concern for the consumers. Health awareness and environmental concerns have led to shift from powder detergent to liquid detergent. This has resulted in a decreasing consumption of powder detergents. The liquid detergent market is growing at a rapid pace due to eco-friendly alternatives.

Key vendors

BASF

Evonik Industries

Occidental Petroleum Corporation

PQ Corporation

W.R Grace

Other prominent vendors

Albemarle Corporation

CIECH Vitrosilicon

Global Drilling Fluids & Chemcials

?Huber

IQE Group

?Kiran Global Chem

?Nippon Chemical Industrial

Rhodia

Shanti Chemical Works

Shaoxing Chang New Materials

Shayona Group

Shijiazhuang Shuanglian Chemical Industry

Sinchem Silica Gel

Tokuyama

Key Topics Covered:

Executive Summary Scope Of The Report Research Methodology Introduction Market Landscape Market Segmentation By Application Geographical Segmentation Decision Framework Drivers And Challenges Market Trends Vendor Landscape Key Vendor Analysis Appendix

For more information about this report visit https://www.researchandmarkets.com/research/wf3fhs/global_sodium