Hello Kitty decorations on trishaws in Malaysia’s historical city of Malacca. (Photo: Mohd Rasfan/AFP/Getty Images)

Hello! Here’s what’s happening on Friday.

1. In the wake of the Las Vegas shooting, the National Rifle Association has announced its support for limited gun control. In the first statement since the shooting that killed 58 victims and wounded nearly 500, the NRA said they would be open to regulating bump stocks, which allow rifles to fire at a higher rate than originally designed. Conservative media has also come out in support of a ban.

2. White House chief of staff John Kelly’s phone was reportedly compromised for months. Reports say the phone could have been compromised as early as December 2016, raising concerns that hackers or foreign governments had access to Kelly’s communications while working in the White House.

3. French President Emmanuel Macron has offered to help mediate discussions between Kurds and the Iraqi government. Macron met with Iraqi Prime Minister Haider al-Abadi on Thursday where he said “national reconciliation and inclusive governance” is crucial after the Kurds’ recent independence referendum.

4. Russian hackers have reportedly stolen classified information on how the US defends itself from cyberattacks. The breach occurred after an NSA contractor took highly classified information from the agency and put it on his personal computer.

5. Russia has also been accused of hacking the phones of NATO soldiers stationed near its border. The Washington Post reports the Russian hack was aimed at gaining operational information, to gauge troop strength and intimidate soldiers. In response, some troops have a no smartphone policy, while others are being forced to remove their SIM cards.

6. Tropical Storm Nate has already killed 22 people and threatens to hit the Gulf Coast as a hurricane this weekend. Nicaragua and Costa Rica experienced dangerous flooding and landslides leading to the deaths and the storm is expected to make landfall as a hurricane somewhere near New Orleans on Sunday. Residents have been ordered to evacuate as a precaution.

7. The US has announced it does not intend to extend a 10-day waiver on shipping limitations. Puerto Rico benefited from a waiver to the Jones Act, which requires only domestic ships carry goods between domestic ports. Two senators have introduced a bill to get a permanent exemption for Puero Rico, much like the U.S. Virgin Islands already has.

8. Spain has accused Catalonia of using “blackmail” in its bid for independence. As tensions continue to mount over Catalonia’s plans to secede from the mainland, Spanish Prime Minister Mariano Rajoy has said the government will not negotiate, despite Catalonian lawmakers saying they are ready to declare independence on Monday.

9. Saudi Arabia’s King Salman has arrived in Indonesia, disembarking his plane on his now legendary golden escalator. The visit marks the first time in almost half a century that a Saudi royal has visited Indonesia, the world’s largest Muslim country. King Salman is currently on a tour of Asia aimed at extending Saudi Arabia’s ties with the region and yesterday visited Russia, where his golden escalator stopped, leaving him stuck halfway down.

10. US President Donald Trump has hinted some big news might be coming shortly. In a “weird” photo op on Thursday, White House reporters were summoned for an impromptu photo session between President Donald Trump and senior military officials where Trump warned “Maybe it’s the calm before the storm.” When asked for further detail he responded “You’ll find out.”

And finally…

Here are the ages you peak at everything throughout life.

You can get 10 things straight to your inbox each afternoon by entering your details in the form below.

Business Insider Emails & Alerts Site highlights each day to your inbox. Email Address Join

NOW WATCH: Briefing videos

Business Insider Emails & Alerts Site highlights each day to your inbox. Email Address Join

Follow Business Insider Australia on Facebook, Twitter, LinkedIn, and Instagram.