JAKARTA, Indonesia and Singapore, Oct. 30, 2017 /PRNewswire/ -- It's time to embrace digital to meet customer demands critical to the digital journey.

The Digital Summit SEA looks into the future of business from the perspective of a digitally savvy consumer fully embracing a complete digital ecosystem -- providing deep, engaging customer experiences through to powerful business insights -- to compete and meet customers' expectations.

Digital Summit focuses on Innovation, Technology and Disruption as the key components of the future of digital economy with a micro focus on key pillars: marketing, advertising, mobile, payments, artificial intelligence (AI), AR&VR (Mixed Reality), predictive analytics, Big Data, cloud computing and Internet of Things.

The organisers of the Digital Summit SEA believe this is a very powerful combination that will ready the future of businesses from the perspective of digitally savvy consumer in the millennial.

The Summit brings together a network of today's best thinkers, visionaries, and thought leads of "C" suites learning how to leverage innovation, technology and disruption as a resource to address the impact of digital-savvy consumers.

The Multiple conference theatres are run with industry specific tracks including Retail, Travel & Hospitality, Food & Beverage, Property, FinTech, Payment, Telcos, Banks, Financial Services, & start-ups.

More than 200 attendees, 25 speakers, 20 sessions are expected at the one-day-summit.

More than just keeping up with the digital-trends, industry leaders need to understand the key pillars, leverage the chances and identify the latest ways to put their business on higher level.

"Indonesia is highly potential to develop digital economy that the country should not be lagging behind in its development," said President Joko Widodo (Jokowi).

For more information about the summit and partnership visit: www.digitalsummitsea.com or email: info@digitalsummitsea.com

Media contact:

Claudia Adrianto

Partnerships Executive

Claudia.Adrianto@gmail.com

+62-812-1010-404

Photo - https://photos.prnasia.com/prnh/20171027/1976119-1

SOURCE Digital Summit SEA