Izza Paulus/ Barcroft Media via Getty Images

An Australian man has been arrested in Bali on drug smuggling charges, which carry the death penalty.

Isaac Emmanuel Roberts, 35, was arrested with 19.97 grams of crystal methamphetamine and 14 ecstasy pills in his luggage on December 4.

Indonesian customs officials claim the drugs were concealed in plastic containers in Roberts’ luggage.

Yesterday at a press conference, which showed Roberts and two other men from Malaysia and the US wearing black balaclavas and orange prison uniforms, police announced the alleged crimes of the men.

Police allege Roberts admitted to being a user of drugs but not a dealer, which could mean he is handed a reduced sentence.

Izza Paulus/ Barcroft Media via Getty Images

Immediately following the press conference, however, Roberts fell ill and was admitted to the Trijata police hospital.

His lawyer told The Daily Telegraph that Roberts often suffered from depression and was a suicide risk, behaviour associated with a long history of drugs.

Leaving the press conference, Fairfax reports Roberts said he had been set up.

“I was invited to this country by someone who was working with the customs officer and they knew I was going to bring something,” he said.

“I’m just a f…..g addict, they want to waste their resources on addicts. They want to punish addicts, this is ridiculous. What about the f…..g importers? I wasn’t going to sell it to anyone here, noone was going to use it here.”

In Australia, Roberts is an accountant and stood as a Liberal Democrats candidate in the 2009 by-election in the electorate of Higgins in Melbourne, following the departure of Peter Costello. The seat was won by Kelly O’Dwyer.

The Department of Foreign Affairs is providing consular assistance.

In 2015, Australians Myuran Sukumaran and Andrew Chan were executed for attempting to smuggle 8.3kg of heroin out of Indonesia in April 2005.

NOW WATCH: Briefing videos

Business Insider Emails & Alerts Site highlights each day to your inbox. Email Address Join

Follow Business Insider Australia on Facebook, Twitter, LinkedIn, and Instagram.