DUBLIN--(BUSINESS WIRE)--The "Global Commercial Aircraft Underwater Location Beacon Market 2017-2021" report has been added to Research and Markets' offering.

The global commercial aircraft underwater location beacon market is forecast to grow at a CAGR of 6.1% during the period 2017-2021.

The report, Global Commercial Aircraft Underwater Location Beacon Market 2017-2021, has been prepared based on an in-depth market analysis with inputs from industry experts. The report covers the market landscape and its growth prospects over the coming years. The report also includes a discussion of the Key vendors operating in this market.

One trend in the market is development of beacons with integrated pressure sensor. A pressure sensor in a ULB is used to measure the water pressure of a fallen aircraft. This sensor can determine the depth of water as the pressure reading in a ULB is directly proportional to the underwater depth of the beacon.

According to the report, one driver in the market is growing procurement of new generation aircraft. In the next 20 years, air travel is expected to double due to the increase in flights in key countries like China, India, Indonesia, Russia, and the US. The year-over-year increase in air traffic has also essentialized the induction of new aircraft to facilitate the growing demand. Aircraft OEMs and their suppliers are revamping their production facilities to ensure scheduled deliveries. The growth in passenger traffic has also led to the requirement for procuring technologically advanced aircraft that can be used for both short-haul and long-haul operations.

Further, the report states that one challenge in the market is delays in scheduled aircraft delivery. Aircraft manufacturers face several process challenges while keeping pace with the market competition. The order and delivery cycles for manufacturers have been irregular for the past decade with the increase in orders, even though the aerospace industry has reached maturity. The industry reaps profits when aircraft are delivered to airline operators within schedule. However, the long duration of the manufacturing process often leads to airline companies canceling their orders due to low demand from aircraft operators.

Key vendors

Dukane Seacom

RJE Internationael

Novega

L3 Technologies

Key Topics Covered:

Part 01: Executive Summary

Part 02: Scope Of The Report

Part 03: Research Methodology

Part 04: Introduction

Part 05: Market Landscape

Part 06: Market Segmentation By Aircraft Type

Part 07: Regional Landscape

Part 08: Decision Framework

Part 09: Drivers And Challenges

Part 10: Market Trends

Part 11: Vendor Landscape

For more information about this report visit https://www.researchandmarkets.com/research/fz2cj3/global_commercial