caption An Indonesian special forces operator breaks cement blocks among the flames. source US Department of Defense

US Secretary of Defense Jim Mattis visited Indonesia on Tuesday to repair ties with the country’s special forces, which committed gross human-rights violations under former Indonesian President Muhammad Suharto.

Mattis was expecting to watch the Indonesian special forces, known as Kopassus, perform a hostage rescue drill – but instead saw them walk on fire, drink snake blood, roll in glass, and more.

Mattis seemed to enjoy the demonstration.

“The snakes! Did you see them tire them out and then grab them? The way they were whipping them around – a snake gets tired very quickly,” Mattis later told reporters, according to Reuters.

Here’s what the Indonesian special forces do:

Mattis visited Indonesia to repair ties with the country’s military, and expected to just observe a hostage rescue demonstration. But he soon found out that that wasn’t the only thing they had in store for him.

caption Mattis reviews the honour guard with Indonesia’s Defence Minister Ryamizard Ryacudu . source Thomson Reuters

Source: Business Insider

The Indonesian special forces, or Kopassus, unsacked snakes and begin whipping them around to tire them out.

The soldiers bit them in half and drank their blood.

caption Indonesian special forces soldiers drink snake blood before US Secretary of Defense Jim Mattis. source Screenshot via Twitter

You can watch it in the short video below.

Special forces in Indonesiademonstrates to Mattis their ability to eat snakes. pic.twitter.com/I24p5adzsG — Paul D. Shinkman (@PDShinkman) January 24, 2018

The soldiers also broke bricks with their heads.

source Screenshot/Al Jazeera

And their fists.

source US Department of Defense

And sledgehammers.

source Screenshot/Al Jazeera

You can watch more of that below.

Drinking snake blood, rollingin glass, breaking bricks with their heads. This is how the Indonesian military demonstrated their uniqueskills for US Secretary of Defense Jim Mattis. pic.twitter.com/jkJs62wVLU — Al Jazeera English (@AJEnglish) January 24, 2018

The special forces operators also walked on fire and rolled in broken glass.

The Indonesian special operators regularly train in tae kwon do.

And smash wood and cement blocks in all sorts of ways.

source Reuters

It’s pretty impressive.

source REUTERS/Oka Barta

The soldiers also train with staffs.

And swords.

The Kopassus has a vicious past, and allegedly raped, murdered, and tortured people under the Suharto regime.

Despite this history, Mattis said he thought the human rights violators of Indonesia’s past had moved on from the special forces.

Mattis said he hopes the US and Indonesian militaries can work together to fight terrorism and limit China’s expansion into the South China Sea.