TOKYO--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Okura Nikko Hotel Management Co., Ltd., a subsidiary of Hotel Okura Co., Ltd., announced Hotel Nikko Bali Benoa Beach has officially opened its doors today. This marks the return of the Hotel Nikko brand in Indonesia two years after the closure of a previous Hotel Nikko property in Nusa Dua, Bali.

At approximately 15 kilometres away from the International Airport Ngurah Rai, Tanjung Benoa used to be a fishing village before evolving into an enclave that now houses exclusive resorts, villas, and water-sport operators - which is what the peninsula is famous for.

Merely steps away from Tanjung Benoa shores, Hotel Nikko Bali Benoa Beach offers 188 spacious guest-rooms and suites decorated in a contemporary Balinese style and fully-equipped with modern comfort. Complemented by a selection of bars and restaurants, an impressive lagoon swimming pool, and a spa, the hotel promises an ideal retreat for its guests to soothe the mind, body, and soul while keeping active with the variety of activities that guests can do within the area. Family travellers can enjoy a complete holiday with specially designed family rooms, and kids friendly facilities.

To lead the hotel, Okura Nikko Hotel Management appointed a couple of familiar faces to the brand with Jean-Charles Le Coz as the General Manager, and Tina Tandun will be the driving force behind the hotel's Sales & Marketing as the Director of Sales & Marketing.

"We are happy to bring back the Hotel Nikko experience in Bali," explained Jean-Charles, "We aim to bring a harmonious blend of Japanese traditions and Balinese warmth under the brand and create a unique concept for all of our guests and business partners.”

Hotel Nikko Bali Benoa Beach is managed by Okura Nikko Hotel Management Co., Ltd., a subsidiary of Hotel Okura Co., Ltd., which has an ambitious plan to expand its global portfolio to 100 properties, primarily in the fast-growing Asian region. Indonesia welcomed over 12 million foreign arrivals during the previous year, reflecting the steady growth of the Indonesian tourism market. Over four million tourists visited Bali during the first eight months of 2017, an almost 120% year-on-year increase. The country is projected to further invest in infrastructure to surpass 20 million foreign tourists by the beginning of 2020, promising steady market growth.

Opening Campaign - SPECIAL OPENING LIMITED OFFER -

Hotel Nikko Bali Benoa Beach welcomes all visitors with a limited time offer at its grand opening. The grand opening campaign “SPECIAL OPENING LIMITED OFFER” will offer discounted rates for reservations between the period below.

Plan name: SPECIAL OPENING LIMITED OFFER

Booking period: March 8 through March 31, 2018

Period of stay: March 8 through June 30, 2018

Room charge: Deluxe Room from IDR 1,397,569

(Per room per night for two persons, including 21% government tax & service charge.)

This offer includes:

• Up to 43% off from Best Available Rate

• Complementary access to Fitness Centre in Spa

• Complementary access to steam room in Spa

• Daily refill of drinking water in room

For Reservations and Inquiries

Okura Nikko Hotels Reservation Center

• Worldwide Direct Number (English)

Phone: +1-817-567-9765 *Toll line, 365 days/24 hours

• Japan (Japanese, English)

Phone: +81-3-5715-7766 *Operating hours: 9:30-18:00 JST

(Closed on year-end and new year holidays)

E-mail: tokyocro@okura-nikko.co.jp

About Hotel Okura Co., Ltd. / Okura Nikko Hotel Management Co., Ltd.

Hotel Okura Co., Ltd. was founded in 1958 and opened its flagship Hotel Okura Tokyo in 1962. Hotel Okura has extensive expertise in the hospitality world, including asset ownership and hotel development, as well as hotel management, restaurant business and chain operations through its subsidiaries and other group companies. The brand unites its member hotels under the Best Accommodation, Cuisine and Service (Best A.C.S.) philosophy to ensure that all guests enjoy Okura’s signature hospitality, which combines Japanese attention to detail and Western functionality. Okura Nikko Hotel Management Co., Ltd., a subsidiary of Hotel Okura operates 73 properties (48 in Japan and 25 overseas) encompassing over 22,650 guest rooms (as of March 1, 2018) under three hotel groups: Okura Hotels & Resorts, Nikko Hotels International and Hotel JAL City. Please visit www.okura-nikko.com/.