The Insider Picks team writes about stuff we think you'll like. Business Insider has affiliate partnerships, so we get a share of the revenue from your purchase.

Round-trip flights are available from a few US cities to Bali, Indonesia for as little as the high-$500.

Normally, these flights would start in the $1,100s or higher.

There's availability from late September – November, and a few more flights from January – February, 2019.

Read on to see how to pull up these fares.

This deal will probably be gone within a day or two — if not sooner — so book quickly!

There's currently a rare sale on flights to Bali (airport code: DPS) from several US cities. The sale first appeared this morning from Washington, DC (IAH) on Qatar Airways, but has expanded as several other airlines have joined in with deals from additional cities.

Hurry, though: Fares like this tend to get snatched up quickly and likely won't be around for long.

Your best bet would be to book as soon as you find dates at the right price, before someone else gets those fares for that day.

Cities

At the time of publication, flights are available from at least six cities, including Chicago (ORD), Los Angeles (LAX), New York City (JFK), San Francisco (SFO), Seattle (SEA), and Washington, DC (IAD). It's possible that other cities are included as well.

Be sure to search for flights from your closest major airport, but if you can't find anything, or if you live elsewhere, consider looking for a cheap positioning flight to one of these cities in order to take advantage of the sale.

Prices

Prices are generally in the mid–high-$500s, depending on the city you fly from and your dates. Flights from Washington, DC are in the high-$700s $800s — higher than the other cities, but still a great deal compared to the usual fares.

Normal prices for these flights could easily be in the $1,200s and higher, depending on what month you fly during.

Airlines

The flights are mostly operated by Qatar Airways — recognized in 2017 as the world's best airline — Taiwanese carrier EVA Air, and Dutch airline KLM.

You can also find low fares on several Chinese airlines, including China Southern, Air China, and China Eastern — these airlines are perfectly fine for long-haul travel, but often have worse records for delays than five-star airlines like EVA and Qatar. Several other airlines may show similar fares as they drop their rates to match the competition.

Dates

Flight availability varies by origin city, but are generally late-September–November and January–February. Most of the discounted fares I could find required a Monday departure.

A few examples available at publication include flights from New York (JFK) from November 5–16 for $526, Washington, DC (IAD) from November 5–19 for $775, Chicago (ORD) from November 5–14 for $586, Los Angeles from November 12–22 for $586, San Francisco from October 29–November 6 for $488 (or $586 on 5-star EVA), and Seattle from February 11–21 for $609.

How to book

To get the best prices, click the links below to visit the online travel-booking site Momondo. Then, enter your nearest major airport and adjust the dates as needed to find the right prices, and click the link to book through the portal showing the best price. Just keep playing with dates until you find something you want to book.

Keep in mind that I was only able to pull up these prices by searching Momondo, which is my go-to site for flight discounts — you can read more about it here. I wasn't able to find the same prices directly with the airlines or through other tools like Google Flights.

Good luck and happy travels!

Find the best holiday deals on our Black Friday Deals and Cyber Monday Deals page. Subscribe to our newsletter..

Disclosure: This post is brought to you by the Insider Picks team. We highlight products and services you might find interesting. If you buy them, we get a small share of the revenue from the sale from our commerce partners. We frequently receive products free of charge from manufacturers to test. This does not drive our decision as to whether or not a product is featured or recommended. We operate independently from our advertising sales team. We welcome your feedback. Email us at insiderpicks@businessinsider.com.

Find all the best offers at our Coupons page.

Read the original article on Insider Picks. Copyright 2018. Follow Insider Picks on Twitter.