A 12-year-old Australian boy ran away from home after getting in a fight with his parents.

He stole the family credit card and traveled alone to Bali for vacation.

He checked himself into a luxury hotel in Bali, where he stayed for four days before his parents tracked him down.

People on the internet had all kinds of reactions to this bizarre story.



Millions of tourists flock to Bali, the tropical island destination in Indonesia that is wildly popular for its pristine beaches, thriving nightlife, and rich culture. Recently, Bali attracted a rather unusual tourist: a 12-year-old boy from Australia who flew to Bali alone after running away from home.

As 9 News reported, the unnamed 12-year-old boy had an argument with his parents one day. "He doesn't like the word 'no,'" his mother explained in an interview with A Current Affair.

After the fight, he told his parents that he was going to school. But instead, he planned his escape. He stole the family credit card, tricked his grandmother into giving him his passport, and then booked a flight to Bali.

In his interview with A Current Affair, he revealed that he had attempted to book a flight with several Australian airlines before he found one — Jetstar — that would allow minors to travel unaccompanied. After telling his parents that he was leaving for school, the boy said he took a train to Sydney airport, checked in successfully at the self-service stations, boarded a Jetstar flight to Perth, and then caught a connecting flight to Bali — all by himself, with only a backpack and scooter in hand.

He said he was never asked why he was traveling alone. "They just asked for my student ID and passport to prove I'm over 12 and that I'm in secondary school," the boy told 9 News.

As 9 News reported, the boy checked into All Seasons luxury hotel when he arrived in Bali. He convinced the staff to let him check in by himself, claiming that his sister would be joining him later. He ended up spending four entire days in Bali all alone. As he explained to A Current Affair, he even managed to hire a motorbike and drink beer during his short vacation.

His parents quickly discovered that their son had never made it to school that day, and they reported him missing. The Australian authorities discovered a photo and video that he had posted, allowing them to track his location. Then they alerted his frantic parents that their son was in Bali.

As his mother Emma explained in the interview with A Current Affair, she felt "shocked" and "disgusted" when they finally discovered that he had gone overseas by himself. "It's way too easy," Emma said in the interview. "There's a problem in our system."

His parents flew to Bali and retrieved their son, but at this point, the bold 12-year-old had already spent $8,000 on their credit card. "I wanted to go on an adventure," he explained to 9 News.

People on the internet have mixed reactions to this bizarre story. Some were not pleased with the way the 12-year-old and his parents behaved.

Why is he being presented as a loveable rogue instead of a little sh**t who needs discipline — Kate Kitching (@booknerd81) April 23, 2018

The parents are a joke. 4 days the kid is gone and they only realise after he puts something on social media. No hope for the kid. — Bradski (@bradski73) April 23, 2018

Never because I was raised to respect my parents and those around me. — Shonda F (@ShondaF22) April 23, 2018

Others were impressed that a 12-year-old managed to sneak away to a foreign country all by himself.

"Drew filled his backpack with enough clothes for a four-day holiday to Bali and then told his parents he was off to school." 😂😂😂😂😭 wow! That beats my high school story of "mum i'm just going to a sleep over" and going to get a piercing instead. HAHA! — D 🌹 XO (@D_Rose_XO) April 21, 2018

Oi @AustGovernment I nominate this boy for Young Australian of the Year https://t.co/IJul7GkJIq — AIMEE FLORES (@itsaimeebby) April 23, 2018

Writer Michael Moran was conflicted over the story.

If I were Drew’s dad I’d probably have some flavour of seizure but you have to concede the boy has the stuff of greatness in him https://t.co/tWrFblwUY3 — Michael Moran (@TheMichaelMoran) April 22, 2018

Dan Saltzstein, an editor at The New York Times Travel section, was impressed by the 12-year-old's initiative.

Not all heroes wear capes (some buy plane tix to Bali with their mom's credit card) https://t.co/9z9gpK9TTZ — Dan Saltzstein (@dansaltzstein) April 23, 2018

No matter how you feel about this story, we can all agree that this 12-year old boy has managed to achieve something that's on the top of all of our bucket lists — an all-expenses-paid solo trip to Bali.