JAKARTA, Indonesia, April 27, 2018 /PRNewswire/ -- In closing the World Water Day 2018 "Nature for Water,"Ministry of Public Works & Housing of the Republic of Indonesia, through the Directorate General of Water Resources, today concluded movements through the National Dialogue "Build a Collective Commitment" on 25 April 2018. Other institutions participated in the discussions, including Commission V of House of Representatives of Republic Indonesia; Directorate General of Watershed Management and Protected Forest, Ministry of Environment & Forestry of Republic Indonesia; Directorate General of Human Settlements (Cipta Karya); Wisdom Park by University of Gadjah Mada (UGM) Residences; and Green Building Council Indonesia, to discuss innovation and water conservation movements within areas of water scarcity in Indonesia, including Rawa Pening and Citarum.

According to National Development Planning Agency, around 72 million people of up to 262 million (total population in Indonesia) have no access to clean water. To overcome this challenge, the government plans to build 65 dams, furthermore targeting to finish 15 lake restorations in Indonesia by 2019. "Specifically, we are focusing on the restoration within Rawa Pening Lake in Central Java, also cleaning up the upstream area of Citarum River in West Java from waste and wastewater. For the program to succeed, we applied the Natural-based Solution approach. Thus, we expect all communities to participate as well," said Basuki Hadimuljono, Minister of Public Works and Housing of the Republic of Indonesia.

The government initiated movement to undertake the Rawa Pening Lake. Previously, more than two-thirds of the area was covered by water hyacinth. "Apart from restoration, we applied two other actions, including preservation and rebuilding process or conservation. Alongside communities, we take further actions such as dredging the lake, constructing the border dyke system, as well as regularly cleaning up the water hyacinth," said Ir. Sujadi, Commission V of the House of Representatives Republic Indonesia. Currently, only 30% of area covered by water hyacinth. "Even more, the location has now become a popular tourist attraction in Central Java," Sujadi added.

Government to Set Goals on Making Citarum River Drinkable by 2025

The World Bank declared Citarum River as one of the most polluted rivers in the world over a decade ago. Ironically, the Citarum currently provides water supply for more than 27 million in West Java. "Hence, the government made it a priority to restore the Citarum River, through the Citarum Harum program," said Basuki Hadimuljono. According to priority programs conducted by President Joko Widodo, the Citarum Rive's water will be drinkable by 2025.

The Ministry of Public Works and Housing of Republic Indonesia initiated real movements to banish any waste from the lifeline river. "As a waste management effort of accumulated waste around the riverbank, we build new final trash disposal site in Legok Nangka, Bandung, West Java, which is able to load up to 1,500 tons of garbage per day. Right before entering the municipal solid waste landfill, we sort the water through 3R (reduce, reuse, recycle) method, in order to reduce solid waste volume at the source. The waste water, we collect then flows into the water purification plant and proceeds through chemicals and filters to remove most toxins and hazards, thus the water will become potable again," said Sri Hartoyo, Directorate General of Human Settlements (Cipta Karya).

Alongside the rainwater, waste water may also be used to generate electrical energy, as well as to support irrigation systems. As stated in Sustainable Development Goals (SDG) 6 by the United Nations, all communities are encouraged to ensure availability and sustainable management of water and sanitation for all, by 2030, to create a better future and world.

About Directorate General of Water Resources

The Directorate General of Water Resources, under the Ministry of Public Works and Housing, has critical roles in formulating and implementing water resources management policies, provided in compliance with relevant legislation.

In order to perform their duties in accordance with the Directorate General of Water Resources, their functions are: policy formulation in the field of water resources conservation, utilization of water resources and to control water damage on surface water resources, and utilization of groundwater in accordance with the provisions of legislation; implementation of integrated water resource management in compliance with the provisions of legislation; preparation of the norms, standards, procedures, and criteria in the field of water resources management; provision of technical guidance and supervision related to water resources management; implementation of evaluation and reporting regarding to water resources management; implementation of the administration of the Directorate General of Water Resources; and implementation of other functions provided by the Minister.

Media Contact:

Komunikasi Publik Setditjen SDA Kementerian PUPR

Kety Fillaily

08158952069

021-7398614

kompu.sda@gmail.com

Photo - https://photos.prnasia.com/prnh/20180427/2117230-1

Logo - https://photos.prnasia.com/prnh/20180322/2086659-1LOGO

SOURCE Ministry of Public Works and Housing of Indonesia