Artist and illustrator Andhika Muksin Photoshops iconic Disney characters into live-action movie screencaps, paparazzi photos of celebrities, and more.

The self-described "Disney dork" has over 69,000 followers on Instagram and Facebook combined.

Muksin told INSIDER that he started creating these digital collages two years ago, as a "therapeutic" side project.

Take a closer look at his playful work below.



Artist and illustrator Andhika Muksin has a growing fan base online thanks to his Disney-inspired collages.

Muksin, who is based in Jakarta, Indonesia, Photoshops iconic Disney princesses and villains alike into live-action movie screencaps, paparazzi photos of celebrities, and more. The artist also sometimes does the reverse, Photoshopping celebrities' faces onto the bodies of animated characters.

The result is a playful and trippy body of work: Muksin's collages defy your expectations in the best way, making you do a double take as you scroll down his Instagram and Facebook feeds.

A post shared by Andhika Muksin (@andhikamuksin) on Sep 10, 2017 at 7:08am PDT

The self-described "Disney dork" told INSIDER that he's been in love with the company's work since he received an "Alice in Wonderland" VHS tape for his seventh birthday. After he graduated from college in the early 2000s, Muksin spent some time creating artwork in various styles and mediums, experimenting with everything from clays and steels to jewelry and acrylic paints.

But when his career path shifted two years ago, Muksin finally got a chance to marry his love for both Disney and art.

"I was no longer in a position where I could produce art full time, so I started creating collages for fun," he said. "It was therapeutic for me after a long day in the office."

A post shared by Andhika Muksin (@andhikamuksin) on Mar 13, 2017 at 8:24pm PDT

For Muksin, these collages are also a nostalgic return to his youth.

"Recreating these beloved characters in more contemporary situations has become a way [for] my childhood icons to grow up with me," he explained.

A post shared by Andhika Muksin (@andhikamuksin) on Jan 26, 2018 at 6:09pm PST

While Muksin may be best known online for his Disney-inspired artwork, he first went viral back in 2014, when Lupita Nyong'o shared one of his digital paintings — a depiction of Nyong'o's character Patsey from "12 Years a Slave" — on her Instagram.

"That simple repost gave me an audience," he said. "That's when I realized that I have thousands of strangers following me on Instagram, and they're all waiting for my next piece. [...] I can't thank Lupita enough."

Driven to "keep creating," the artist said his audience grew again in 2017 when his work was picked up by BuzzFeed, Mashable, Teen Vogue, and more. Muksin, who currently has over 69,000 followers on Instagram and Facebook combined, told INSIDER he was "shook" and "very grateful" for the exposure.

A post shared by Andhika Muksin (@andhikamuksin) on Mar 15, 2018 at 5:19am PDT

Muksin has since been able to connect with people all over the world, which he said has changed how he perceives and creates his collages. He brought up one of his pieces, which shows Prince Eric from "The Little Mermaid" and Prince Phillip from "Sleeping Beauty" embracing (as seen below), as an example.

"Some people personally sent me [direct messages] just to thank me for creating" this collage, the artist told INSIDER. "Because to them, the 'bromance' promotes acceptance, so it really touches me when people see it that way."

He continued: "Some collages have different meanings for people. And having a bigger audience allows me to understand this diversity of reactions a little bit better."

A post shared by Andhika Muksin (@andhikamuksin) on Mar 27, 2017 at 8:06pm PDT

Muksin said he sometimes gets criticized by people who claim that what he does "is not art" — that "it's too simple to be called art." But at the end of the day, he told INSIDER, he's "not trying to be the next Picasso or Andy Warhol" — he just wants to "bring a smile" to people's faces.

"I make these collages just for fun," he said. "I'm happy to make people happy you know, that's the best feeling ever."

When asked if he has any advice for new artists, Muksin said to "fall in love with what you do" and "be consistent" with that passion.

"Sometimes the situation won't allow you to practice as you'd like, but see it as the universe trying to tell you something" he said. "Take cues from it, learn from it, and use what you learned to expand your artistic capabilities."

A post shared by Andhika Muksin (@andhikamuksin) on Dec 2, 2017 at 7:54am PST

To see more from Andhika Muksin, follow him on Instagram and Facebook.

Sign up here to get INSIDER's favorite stories straight to your inbox.