DUBLIN--(BUSINESS WIRE)--The "Global Cumene Market - Segmented by Application, Ingredients, Manufacturing Process, and Geography - Growth, Trends and Forecast (2018 - 2023)" report has been added to ResearchAndMarkets.com's offering.

The global cumene market is expected to witness a CAGR of approximately 4.8%, during the forecasted period.

Cumene is a flammable and colorless liquid and a constituent of refined fuels and crude oil. It is made primarily for phenol and acetone production, which consume more than 90% of all cumene. Therefore, cumene has a close dependency on phenol. The growing demand for phenol from plastics and composites segment has significantly increased the demand for cumene.

Cumene is majorly required in the manufacturing of polycarbonate. Polycarbonate has been one of the booming markets with steady growth. PC resins are significantly consumed in automotive industry. Thus, with the consistent growth in the automotive industry, globally, the demand for PC is expected to increase and growth trend is expected to continue during the forecast period.

In terms of consumption in 2017, Asia-Pacific held the largest share. The demand for cumene in countries including China, India, and Indonesia are expected to rise at a great pace owing to the increasing demand for phenol and acetone, owing to growing automotive and construction industry in the abovementioned countries. However, the harmful effects of cumene on extended exposure may hamper the market growth to a certain extent in the region during the forecast period.

Companies Mentioned

BASF SE

Braskem SA

Cepsa Chemical Shanghai

Chang Chun Plastics Co. Ltd.

Domo Chemicals

Exxonmobil Corporation

Honeywell UOP

Ineos Group Limited

Taiwan Cement Corporation

The Dow Chemical Company

Total S.A.

Key Topics Covered:

1. Introduction

2. Executive Summary

3. Market Insights

4. Market Dynamics

5. Market Segmentation and Analysis

6. Regional Market Analysis

7. Future of the Market

8. Competitive Landscape

9. Company Profiles

10. Disclaimer

For more information about this report visit https://www.researchandmarkets.com/research/2s98dw/global_cumene?w=4