Brody Jenner, a member of the greater Kardashian family and former member of the "The Hills" cast, is getting married.

Apparently, his sisters Kendall and Kylie Jenner didn't RSVP to his wedding and he's upset.

Caitlyn Jenner also won't be there.

Brody Jenner, a member of the greater Kardashian family and former member of the "The Hills" cast, is getting married in Bali, Indonesia, this weekend.

Jenner and his fiancée Kaitlynn Carter, a blogger and the co-founder of Foray Collective, have been celebrating their upcoming nuptials in Indonesia for about a week already. This destination wedding has everything! Sun, tourism, beaches, and alcohol served in shoes.

But one thing is decidedly missing — Brody's sisters, Kendall and Kylie Jenner. Brody told People that his little sisters are evidently skipping out on his big day.

"My two little sisters, we never even heard from them. They never even RSVP'd I don't think," Brody said.

It seems that Brody has few regrets, though.

" We sent them an invite but we just never heard anything back," he said. "Well, they'll be missed. I would have loved to have had them there."

For what it's worth, Brody doesn't seem to be too close with Kylie and Kendall. Back in February, Brody told TMZ that it had been nearly two years since he'd last seen Kylie. The outlet reported that the two are so distant that Brody didn't know that Kylie was pregnant until the whole world did. The nature of Kendall and Brody's relationship is unclear. Perhaps his airing of dirty family laundry contributed to the sisters' decision not to attend?

And Kendall and Kylie aren't the only Jenner women who will be missing from the affair. Caitlyn Jenner — that's with a C and one N, for those of you keeping track — will also not be attending due to a prior work commitment, People reported.

But don't worry! "everything is good between them," according to People. Caitlyn will reportedly throw the couple a party when they get back from their getaway.

Need further proof that all's well between Caitlyn and Brody? Well, Caitlyn attended Kaitlynn's bridal shower just a month ago.

Went to my first bridal shower, for Brody's fiancé Kaitlynn Carter. I had so much fun! PS so much better than Bachelor parties! A post shared by Caitlyn Jenner (@caitlynjenner) on Apr 1, 2018 at 1:45pm PDT on Apr 1, 2018 at 1:45pm PDT

And, after all, Brody isn't alone on his love island. His brother Brandon, mom Linda Thompson, and just a few of his closest friends have all gathered to celebrate.

#JennerIsland celebration continues embracing Balinese culture with @brodyjenner & @kaitlynn #love&marriage A post shared by Linda Thompson (@ltlindathompson) on May 27, 2018 at 11:50pm PDT on May 27, 2018 at 11:50pm PDT

Ah, marriage is what brings us together — unless we're the extended Kardashian-Jenner family, that is.

Representatives for Kendall, Kylie, and Caitlyn Jenner didn't immediately return INSIDER's request for comment.

Sign up here to get INSIDER's favorite stories straight to your inbox.