VANCOUVER, British Columbia--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Blockmason, a technology startup, has announced today the release of Lndr v1.1 with multi-currency functionality. Lndr, the “Venmo of the Blockchain”, is a peer-to-peer expense sharing mobile app for iOS and Android that uses the Credit Protocol and the Ethereum blockchain to create, manage and settle casual debts and IOUs between friends.

While Bitcoin democratized the transfer and storage of money and Ethereum democratized the creation and storage of monetary contracts, Blockmason’s Credit Protocol takes the next step by democratizing the creation of credit. The Credit Protocol allows individuals and businesses to securely record and permanently store mutually-confirmed debt or credit obligations on the blockchain. As one of the first mobile decentralized apps or “dApps,” Lndr is the premier showcase of the Credit Protocol and envisions a future in which peer-to-peer financial transactions are simple and efficient.

“Blockmason was founded on the belief that blockchain technologies are the architectural foundation for the next millennium. It’s our aim to help achieve this vision by building a formidable edifice of libraries, contracts, programs and decentralized apps,” said Michael Chin, CEO and Founder of Blockmason. “This new release of Lndr is a showcase for how our Credit Protocol and the blockchain can propel the $5 trillion consumer credit market into a more transparent and healthy future.”

With Lndr v1.1, users can now record IOUs, loans or debts in more than 20 of the world's most popular currencies. Further, users can settle these obligations across multiple currencies as they travel from one country to another. Lndr v1.1 also adds support for ten new languages including Arabic, Czech, Hebrew, Hindi, Hungarian, Indonesian, Russian, Turkish, Thai and Vietnamese. Lndr v1.1 has been submitted to Apple's App Store and Google's Play Store and will be available for download on Thursday, June 14, 2018.

About Blockmason

Blockmason is a world-class developer of blockchain technology, focused on building the foundational base-layer frameworks that support the blockchain revolution. Their first product, the Credit Protocol, provides a standardized, secure and reliable means for recording and permanently storing mutually-confirmed debt or credit obligations on the blockchain. Lndr, the first decentralized app powered by the Credit Protocol, leverages the blockchain to allow friends to quickly record and settle casual debts and IOUs in dozens of currencies. To learn more about Blockmason, the Credit Protocol, Lndr and their other technological developments, visit https://blockmason.io.