JAKARTA, Indonesia, July 20, 2018 /PRNewswire/ -- Canada is becoming an increasingly attractive destination for IELTS test takers wishing to work, study or emigrate overseas, with recent global surveys putting it second only to the U.S. as a desired destination for people looking to emigrate. At the same time, the Canadian Government has increased its immigration targets up to 2020, boosting opportunities for moving to Canada.

As the most widely used test of English for migration to the UK, Australia, Canada and New Zealand, the International English Language Testing System (IELTS) helps provide Indonesian with the opportunity to fulfil their ambition of going to Canada to work or study. IELTS is launching a new Canada campaign - You CAN Get There - in Indonesia. The campaign aims to provide individuals with all they need to know about taking the International English Language Testing System (IELTS) and how it can help them to study, work or emigrate to Canada.

IELTS is the world's most popular high-stakes English language test, with over three million tests taken in the past year, and it is recognised by more than 10,000 universities, schools, employers and immigration bodies.

In Canada, IELTS is the English test of choice for educational organisations, professional associations and employers across Canada.

IELTS is accepted and recognised by over 350 Canadian organisations for study or work purposes.

It was the first test to be recognised by Immigration, Refugees and Citizenship Canada (IRCC) and Immigration Quebec as proof of English language proficiency for Express Entry (Skilled Immigrants), Quebec-selected skilled workers and the Provincial Nominee program.

With the IELTS General training version of the test, test takers wishing to emigrate to Canada can apply through the Canadian Express Entry system.

British Council Indonesia Foundation has delivered IELTS in Indonesia since 2015. Test takers can take the IELTS test with the British Council Indonesia Foundation in Jakarta, Bandung, Yogyakarta, Surabaya, Medan and Makassar.

Taking IELTS with the British Council includes a variety of benefits, such as free access to Road to IELTS, an online self-study resource for test takers, and expert support from videos, apps and books to interactive courses.

For more information please visit https://www.ieltsasia.org/id/study-in-canada

For more information, contact our Examinations team on +62 21 2933 3470 ext. 275 or exams@britishcouncil.or.id

Notes to Editors:

International English Language Testing System (IELTS)

IELTS is the International English Language Testing System, the world's most popular English language proficiency test for higher education and global migration with over 3 million tests taken in the last year. Over 10,000 organisations trust and accept IELTS as a secure, valid and reliable indicator of true to life ability to communicate in English for education, immigration and professional accreditation. IELTS is jointly owned by British Council, IDP: IELTS Australia and Cambridge Assessment English.

British Council is the United Kingdom's international organisation for education and cultural relations. Dedicated to building trust through the exchange of knowledge between people worldwide, the British Council is represented in over 100 countries.

About the test

Test takers are measured in listening, reading, writing and speaking. All tests are scored on a banded system from 1 (the lowest) through to 9 (the highest band).

IELTS offers a choice of two test versions, to serve both academic and non-academic purposes. IELTS Academic measures English language proficiency needed for an academic, higher learning environment. The tasks and texts are accessible to all test takers, irrespective of their subject focus. IELTS General Training measures English language proficiency in a practical, everyday context. The tasks and texts reflect both workplace and social situations. IELTS General Training is suitable for immigration purposes to Australia, Canada, New Zealand and the United Kingdom and Ireland.

A sample of government and professional associations who recognise or require applicants to hold an IELTS test result include:

Immigration, Refugees and Citizenship Canada (IRCC)

Australian Department of Immigration and Border Protection

UK Visas and Immigration

Commission on Graduates of Foreign Nursing Schools and National Council of State Boards of Nursing, USA

International Monetary Fund

SOURCE British Council (IELTS)