JAKARTA, Indonesia, Aug. 1, 2018 /PRNewswire/ -- EdTech Asia Summit, the biggest education technology industry event, was held in Hong Kong from 26 - 27 July 2018. With the theme of "Learning and Workshop Innovation and Insights", the event was attended by hundreds of education technology companies, inventors, entrepreneurs and education organizations from all over Asia. Quipper, in this occasion, received an opportunity to represent Indonesia in a panel discussion session.

The panel discussion topics ranged from education technology landscape in Asia, the use of Artificial Intelligence, the role of teachers and many others. Takuya Homma, the Country Manager of Quipper Indonesia, spoke alongside other players in education technology sectors namely ALSET (National University of Singapore), Topica (Vietnam), Edukasyon (The Philippines) and Jaipuna (New Zealand). The topic discussed in the conference was ASEAN's Emerging Tiger Markets: Opportunities and Challenges.

As some of the strongest EdTech powerhouses with strong business foundations, Quipper and Topica were asked to share challenges and opportunities in building EdTech businesses with such explosive growth in the region.

Takuya said, "Quipper, as one of the biggest EdTech players in the region, feels a responsibility to set the right and clear agenda for future education dialogues, so that the education industry in Southeast Asia will continue to grow fast, as education is a very important component for the future prosperity of the region."

Other Indonesian representatives participating in Edtech Asia Summit 2018 were Zenius and Solve Education! Sabda, the founder of Zenius, said, "Indonesia is one of the fastest growing EdTech markets in the world, and there is a huge potential and room for improvement. We are dedicated to developing a healthy education ecosystem with various players in the nation, and grow this important industry together with them."

"Efficacy and effectiveness are very important in education. I'mglad to see some players are talking about this, and we want to bring high quality education toIndonesia," added Talitha from Solve Education!

Quipper, being the global leading EdTech company that is committed to providing access to high quality education for Indonesia, expects that all elements of society will give their contribution to deliver quality education content in Indonesia.

About Quipper

Quipper is a global leading education technology company that strives to bring the best education to every corner of the world. We believe every child deserves an opportunity to learn - an opportunity to create the future they aspire to. At Quipper, we harness technology to achieve just this.

Quipper services empower educators and learners alike by breaking down barriers in learning to help learners realize their full potential through our products: Quipper Video, Quipper School and Quipper Campus. Currently Quipper services have been used by more than 5 million students and more than 350,000 teachers and operated in five countries: United Kingdom, Japan, Philippines, Mexico and Indonesia.

For more info, please visit www.quipper.com

Media Contact

Quipper Indonesia

Ike Yuningsih

Public Relations

ike.yuningsih@quipper.com

+62-1-2953-3315

Photo - https://photos.prnasia.com/prnh/20180801/2201340-1

SOURCE Quipper Ltd.