WINSTON-SALEM, N.C.--(BUSINESS WIRE)--HanesBrands, a socially responsible manufacturer and marketer of leading everyday basic apparel, has introduced its first line of Hanes women’s apparel and a unisex collection from Alternative in collaboration with the National Park Foundation.

HanesBrands and the NPF, the official nonprofit partner of the National Park Service, launched a five-year partnership in April 2018 to encourage awareness, exploration and conservation of America’s parks. The partnership will generate $4 million for NPF and feature designs from the company’s Hanes, Alternative and Champion brands.

The new Hanes women’s collection, which launched this month, features a variety of designs depicting some of nature’s most beautiful and recognized landmarks, including the Grand Canyon, Redwood National Park and Denali, as well as statement shirts encouraging outdoor exploration and adventure. All designs are printed on the brand’s V-neck T-shirts and are available for $12.99 via Hanes online and in the company’s retail outlet stores across the country.

“HanesBrands is proud to produce a line with the National Park Foundation that celebrates and supports these historical treasures,” said Rachel Newman, vice president of sales, American Casualwear, for HanesBrands. “Our first women’s collection reflects several of our nation’s most iconic landmarks, while delivering the Hanes comfort that consumers know and love.”

Alternative debuted its first National Park Foundation collection in June. The unisex line comes in multiple styles with artist-designed, vintage silhouettes of iconic national parks, such as the Great Smoky Mountains, Joshua Tree, Rocky Mountain and Acadia. All designs are printed on the brand’s eco-friendly fabrics and are available for $38 and up online or in Alternative’s California stores in Venice and San Francisco.

“Working alongside the National Park Foundation to develop these collections has allowed us to create a unique product that encourages people of all backgrounds to get outside and explore the world around them,” Newman said. “We are excited about our current collections, as well as the opportunity to evolve them during the next few years.”

For more information about the HanesBrands and National Park Foundation partnership, visit https://www.hanes.com/shop/hanes/nationalpark.

HanesBrands

HanesBrands is a socially responsible leading marketer of everyday basic innerwear and activewear apparel in the Americas, Europe, Australia and Asia-Pacific. The company markets T-shirts, bras, panties, shapewear, underwear, socks, hosiery, and activewear under some of the world’s strongest apparel brands, including Hanes, Champion, Maidenform, DIM, Bali, Playtex, Bonds, JMS/Just My Size, Nur Die/Nur Der, L’eggs, Lovable, Wonderbra, Berlei, Alternative, Gear for Sports, and Bras N Things. More information about the company and its award-winning corporate social responsibility initiatives may be found at www.Hanes.com/corporate. Visit our newsroom at https://newsroom.hanesbrands.com/. Connect with HanesBrands via social media on Twitter (@HanesBrands) and Facebook (www.facebook.com/hanesbrandsinc).

National Park Foundation

Celebrating 50 years, the National Park Foundation is the official charity of America’s national parks and nonprofit partner to the National Park Service. Chartered by Congress in 1967, the National Park Foundation raises private funds to help PROTECT more than 84 million acres of national parks through critical conservation and preservation efforts, CONNECT all Americans with their incomparable natural landscapes, vibrant culture and rich history, and ENGAGE the next generation of park stewards. In 2016, commemorating the National Park Service’s 100th anniversary, the Foundation launched The Centennial Campaign for America’s National Parks, a comprehensive fundraising campaign to strengthen and enhance the future of these national treasures for the next hundred years. Find out more and become a part of the national park community at www.nationalparks.org.