Ulet Ifansasti/Getty Images A man rides motorcycle through collapsed houses after Friday prayer following the earthquake in Pemenang on August 10, 2018 in Lombok Island, Indonesia.

The Indonesian island of Lombok was hit with a series of deadly earthquakes on Sunday.

Fourteen people died following the earthquakes that struck just hours apart.

The island is still reeling from three major earthquakes earlier this month that left hundreds dead and heavily damaged the tourist site.

The Indonesian tourist island of Lombok was hit with a series of deadly earthquakes just two weeks after earthquakes killed at least 430 people.

Several major quakes hit the popular holiday destination. The first hit the island on Sunday evening at about 10 p.m. and measured a powerful magnitude 6.9, according to the US Geological Survey.

Inilah gempa 6,9 SR dan gempa susulannya (warna merah) yang mengguncang Lombok pada 19/8/2018 pukul 19.56 WIB hingga 20/8/2018 pukul 08.00 WIB. Sumber gempa berasal dari Sesar Naik Flores di utara Pulau Lombok dan Sumbawa. pic.twitter.com/7RGS2DXo1X — Sutopo Purwo Nugroho (@Sutopo_PN) August 20, 2018

The event was followed by strong aftershocks.

Another strong 6.3 magnitude quake hit the island Monday morning. At least 14 people on Lombok or nearby Sumbawa island were killed by collapsing buildings or heart attacks, National Disaster Mitigation Agency spokesman Sutopo Purwo Nugroho tweetedMonday.

Dampak gempa 6.9 SR di Lombok dan Sumbawa update per 20/8/2018 pukul 19.00 WIB: 14 orang meninggal dunia (Lombok Timur 6, Lombok Tengah 1, Sumbawa 6, Sumbawa Barat 1), 24 orang luka, 151 rumah rusak, 6 fasilitas peribatan rusak dan 1 kantor rusak. Bantuan terus disalurkan. pic.twitter.com/BurOxaPSHz — Sutopo Purwo Nugroho (@Sutopo_PN) August 20, 2018

The larger earthquake occurred at a depth of 12.5 miles.

Beginilah kondisi di Desa Belanting saat gempa kembali melanda #lombok . Tim #PMI yang sedang membuat masjid darurat, sontak bantu evakuasi warga ke lokasi yang aman #PMISiapBantu pic.twitter.com/2Wq7K9y34a — Indonesian Red Cross (@palangmerah) August 19, 2018

Several houses were reported to have been damaged or collapsed.

The island is still reeling from three major earthquakes earlier this month that left hundreds dead and heavily damaged the tourist site.

Dozens of people have been injured in the last month. The earthquakes earlier in August have caused an estimated $US469 million in damage.

Rescuers have found some remote areas hard to reach because bridges and roads have been destroyed by the earthquakes. Hundreds of thousands of people fled their homes and have been put in temporary shelters.

Indonesia is prone to earthquakes as it is situated in the “Ring of Fire,” an area in the basin of the Pacific Ocean where many tremors and volcanic eruptions occur.

NOW WATCH: Briefing videos

Business Insider Emails & Alerts Site highlights each day to your inbox. Email Address Join

Follow Business Insider Australia on Facebook, Twitter, LinkedIn, and Instagram.