SINGAPORE, Aug. 20, 2018 /PRNewswire/ -- Frozen Lime Asia, specialist in Revenue, Distribution, Sales & Marketing for Hospitality and Tourism in Asia, has been appointed General Sales Agent (GSA) for Small Luxury Hotels of The World (SLH), with immediate effect.

SLH, champions of small, luxury hotels around the world, has more than 500 hotels in its exclusive membership worldwide, covering 80 countries. In Asia Pacific alone, there are more than 120 hotels in its stable and these offer independently-minded travellers a unique luxury experience complemented with the highest standards of intuitive service.

This significant tie-up will see FLA focus on generating corporate meetings and leisure group leads for SLH member hotels from Singapore, Hong Kong, Malaysia and Indonesia.

Ms Jagdish Sandhu, CEO/Co-Founder Frozen Lime Asia said: "Frozen Lime Asia is very proud to be associated with Small Luxury Hotels of the World and to be given the opportunity to work with their vast footprint of Asia Pacific hotels across different property types. This significantly enhances the hotels and experiences we are able to offer to our travel partners and corporate clients from key markets in Asia. We look forward to a winning formula that delivers to all partners."

Ms Serene Law, VP/Co-Founder Frozen Lime Asia added: "Team FLA has a wide network of industry contacts, partners and corporate clients that we work with, not to mention our GSA partners across the world. With this Small Luxury Hotels tie-up, Team FLA will be able to assist to grow new leads for leisure groups, corporate meetings for SLH hotels in Asia Pacific, offering our clients many types of specialised and unique travel and stay experiences across their destinations -- a win-win for all concerned."

Mr Mark Wong, VP Asia Pacific, SLH had this to say: "With our spread of hotels in Asia and across the world, new leads from key markets are important for growing inbound business for our member hotels. We believe that FLA with its dedicated team of experienced sales personnel will be able to help us grow our group business, tapping on their industry contacts and wide sales networks."

About Frozen Lime Asia

Frozen Lime Asia operates out of Singapore and offers a unique blend of optimisation best practices, sales representation and marketing services to increase our clients' market share. We provide value through shared costs and headcount, objective recommendations, and go-to-market strategies that best suit client needs, markets and budgets, all whilst integrating the right ingredients for the best results.

We bring resource, expertise and people-talent that span many years and multiple geographies -- Asia, Pacific and beyond. With our combined experience in keen analytics, sales and forecast, marketing and communications, we work on a dynamic approach for clients who seek our expertise.

For more information, visit: www.frozenlimeasia.com or contact Aileene Thangaveloo, aileenethangaveloo@frozenlimeasia.com

View our Portfolio of hospitality clients here: https://www.frozenlimeasia.com/portfolio/

About Small Luxury Hotels of the World

Small Luxury Hotels of the World™ (SLH) matches independently minded guests with independently spirited hotels. The diverse collection of over 500 hotels in more than 80 countries around the world includes everything from cutting edge design hotels and city centre sanctuaries to historic country mansions and remote private islands -- all SLH hotels are consistently different, however, they are all united by the fact that they offer the best locations, highest quality, personalised service and a truly authentic way to discover a destination. Guests can join SLH's loyalty programme, INVITED, to receive Small Luxuries from their very first visit. Reservations for any SLH hotel can be made online at www.slh.com or via the iPhone app, by contacting a travel agent or calling a Small Luxury Hotels of the World reservations office; click here to view a listing by country.

Logo - https://photos.prnasia.com/prnh/20180817/2214894-1LOGO-a

Logo - https://photos.prnasia.com/prnh/20180817/2214894-1LOGO-b

Photo - https://photos.prnasia.com/prnh/20180817/2214894-1

SOURCE Frozen Lime Asia