JAKARTA, Indonesia, Aug. 29, 2018 /PRNewswire/ -- The content discovery platform Dable is picking up the pace in its entry into the Indonesian market by forging partnerships with major Indonesian media corporations.

Dable, a member company of the K-ICT Born2Global Centre, signed service partnerships with half of Indonesia's top 20 media corporations (Tempo, Republika, Kontan, JPNN, etc.), securing local inventory. Dable stated that it is currently attracting local Indonesian and global advertisers also seeking to enter the Indonesian market.

Based in South Korea, Dable utilizes real-time big data processing and personalization technologies to provide two major services: "Dable Content Recommendation" and "Dable Native Ad," which recommends individually-tailored content and advertisements (e.g. "Content You May Like").

Dable Content Recommendation provides visitors to the websites of media companies with individually-tailored news and other content. The service aims to increase content usage as well as traffic flow. Through analysis of the consumed website content, Dable Native Ad ascertains user interests and shows them related advertisements. Dable's high advertisement performance is the result of decreased animosity towards ads that are in formats similar to regular content.

Since its founding in 2015, Dable has grown rapidly through partnerships with major Korean media corporations. It enjoys an 80-percent market share in Korea, but with its outstanding personalization technology and high performance, Dable is currently expanding into the greater Asian market. The company's entry into Indonesia was spearheaded by its Global Business Manager Amalia Rasyida (a seasoned digital marketing expert), and the recruitment of personnel with extensive experience.

Rasyida expressed her expectations for the company by stating, "Right now, Programmatic advertisements, which provide digital ads and tools, are in the spotlight. But the native ad platform applied with Dable's personalization technology is in its infancy. Dable is now sophisticated enough to defeat top global companies in the technological competition arena. Dable is using its technology to expand its Indonesian partnered inventory at the astonishing speed of over 50 percent growth each month. Dable seeks to serve as a leading content discovery platform in Indonesia."

On September 12, Dable will host media and digital marketing representatives at the Indonesia Native Ad Conference (INAC) at Plaza Kuningan's COCOWORK.

For more detailed information on Dable, please visit https://dable.io/id/

Media contact:



Sabrina Rahma Azalia

Partnership Manager of Dable

bizdev@dable.io



Jina Lee

PR Manager of Born2Global

jlee@born2global.com



Photo - https://photos.prnasia.com/prnh/20180828/2222203-1

SOURCE K-ICT Born2Global Centre