Technavio has published a new market research report on the global thermal ceramics market from 2018-2022. (Graphic: Business Wire)

Technavio has published a new market research report on the global thermal ceramics market from 2018-2022. (Graphic: Business Wire)

LONDON--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Technavio analysts have predicted the global thermal ceramics market to grow at a CAGR of over 6% during the forecast period, according to their latest market research report.

The increasing demand for lightweight and high-performance materials is one of the major trends being witnessed in the global thermal ceramics market 2018-2022. Demand has gone up for lightweight and high-performance materials from various end-user industries. These advanced materials can be used in various industrial applications to reap benefits from their energy-saving and wear-resistance properties. They are preferred in high-friction applications as thermally conductive materials. These materials are widely used in the aerospace and defense, and automobile industries. Among the various types of high-performance materials, thermal ceramics are the most preferred given their tendency to be temperature and thermal shock resistant while also being non-conductive.

This report is available at a USD 1,000 discount for a limited time only: View market snapshot before purchasing

According to Technavio analysts, one of the key factors contributing to the growth of the global thermal ceramics market is the enforcement of stringent safety guidelines:

Global thermal ceramics market: Enforcement of stringent safety guidelines

Regulatory agencies are enforcing stringent rules and regulations regarding safety in the work environment. These rules also mandate thermal insulation, chemical safety, and electrical safety in risky and hazardous working environments. A similar trend is being observed in emerging countries such as India and Brazil where the incidence of workplace accidents is high due to the lack of adequate safety measures. Workplace accidents result in costly compensation, loss of productive hours, and high medical costs.

According to a senior analyst at Technavio for research on specialty chemicals, “Organizations are increasingly adopting appropriate insulation materials in machinery and other equipment. The global count of the industrial workforce is on a continuous rise, with countries such as India, China, Indonesia, and Brazil leading the trend. This will likely increase the need for safety, hence, the high demand for thermal ceramics.”

Global thermal ceramics market: Segmentation analysis

The global thermal ceramics market research report provides market segmentation by product (ceramic fibers and insulation bricks), by end-user (mining and metal processing, petrochemicals, manufacturing, and power generation), and by region (the Americas, EMEA, and APAC). It provides an in-depth analysis of the prominent factors influencing the market, including drivers, opportunities, trends, and industry-specific challenges.

Ceramic fibers held the largest market share in 2017, accounting for nearly 78% of this market. This product segment is expected to dominate the global market throughout the forecast period.

APAC led the market in 2017 with a market share of nearly 40%. This region is expected to dominate the market through 2022, with an increase in its market share by nearly 2%.

Looking for more information on this market? Request a free sample report

Technavio’s sample reports are free of charge and contain multiple sections of the report such as the market size and forecast, drivers, challenges, trends, and more.

Some of the key topics covered in the report include:

Market Landscape

Market ecosystem

Market characteristics

Market segmentation analysis

Market Sizing

Market definition

Market size and forecast

Five Forces Analysis

Market Segmentation

Geographical Segmentation

Regional comparison

Key leading countries

Market Drivers

Market Challenges

Market Trends

Vendor Landscape

Vendors covered

Vendor classification

Market positioning of vendors

Competitive scenario

About Technavio

Technavio is a leading global technology research and advisory company. Their research and analysis focuses on emerging market trends and provides actionable insights to help businesses identify market opportunities and develop effective strategies to optimize their market positions.

With over 500 specialized analysts, Technavio’s report library consists of more than 10,000 reports and counting, covering 800 technologies, spanning across 50 countries. Their client base consists of enterprises of all sizes, including more than 100 Fortune 500 companies. This growing client base relies on Technavio’s comprehensive coverage, extensive research, and actionable market insights to identify opportunities in existing and potential markets and assess their competitive positions within changing market scenarios.

If you are interested in more information, please contact our media team at media@technavio.com.