BALI, Indonesia, Sept. 19, 2018 /PRNewswire/ -- Indonesia is set to host the world's largest Inter-Ministerial Conference on South-South and Triangular Cooperation, September 18-20, 2018. Being held in Kartika Discovery Hotel, Bali, the conference is supported by Indonesian National Population & Family Planning Board (BKKBN), along with the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA).

Around 50 member countries from South-South Cooperation are joined the conference entitled "Demographic and Development Issues to Meet the SDGs." It aims to reevaluate key implications of unfinished International Conference on Population and Development Program (ICPD) plan, with main focus on family planning, reproductive health, and the demographic dividend.

Among the conference speakers in Bali are Indonesia's Minister of Health Nila Djuwita F. Moeloek; United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) Asia Pacific Regional Director, Bjorn Andersson (representing UNFPA executive director, Dr. Natalia Kanem); Secretary of Partners in Population and Development (PPD) Susan Shabangu; and BKKBN Chairperson, Dr. Sigit Priohutomo. Ministers from several countries also participate in this conference. To ensure universal access to reproductive health care services, including for family planning, information, and education, as the main objectives of SDGs 2030, the conference focused on 6 key topics:

Low birth rate and elderly population;

Demographic bonus and the implications;

Sexual and reproductive health, family planning, and sexual and reproductive rights;

Humanity;

Current population survey and census methodology; and

The impact of South-South and Triangular cooperation to eliminate the challenges of population growth

"Through this conference, we provide a forum where the developing countries could discuss about new opportunities and ideas to successfully reach the SDGs, based on their expertise and experiences. We also encourage them to innovate new programs that will improve the social impact that benefits all communities in demographic and sustainable development sector," said Nila Djuwita F. Moeloek, Minister of Health Republic of Indonesia at the opening event. For global development, the South-South and Triangular cooperation is a game-changer for middle income countries, to share valuable lessons and bilateral ties in order to achieve Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) 2030.

With the total population of more than 260 million, Indonesia has actively involved in supporting the South-South cooperation for nearly four decades. It strengthens on two key points that include population issues and sustainable development. Indonesia has also facilitated exchange programs for professionals in family planning that involve 5,100 people from 104 countries, through capacity development program and training.

Following the cooperation, Indonesian government recently signed Memorandum of Understanding with the government of Seychelles and the Philippines Commission of Population (Pop Com). The MoU will catalyst a dialog to develop long-term strategies on supporting youth, children, and women to improve the economy and better health for communities, as a part of UNFPA's strategic plan framework.

"Our collaborations are solidified through the equal partnership between the two countries. Thus, we encourage both parties to develop adequate participation and to evaluate consistent quality and social impact of the socio-economic development program," said Sigit Priohutomo.

Bjorn Andersson adds, "We continue to see positive outcomes of the partnership and innovation that have evolved over time. To follow, UNFPA and all partners would significantly decrease maternal death rate, gender-based violence, and unmet need for family planning, which has been our primary goals to be achieved by 2030." To conclude the event, the Annual Board Meeting of Partners in Population and Development (PPD) and International Council on Management (ICOMP) will also be held, in efforts to achieve that target at all levels of health and wealth in developing countries.

About BKKBN:

The National Population and Family Planning Board (BKKBN) is a non-ministerial government board in Indonesia responsible for carrying out government duties in the field of population, family planning and promoting prosperous families. BKKBN has a vision on population balances and optimizing the quality of family life, prioritizing population-oriented development, family planning and reproductive health, family development, as well as develop partnership network in population management, family planning and family development.

For more information, visit: www.bkkbn.go.id

Media Contact:

Fabiola T

National Population & Family Planning Board

Email: fabiolatazrina@yahoo.com

Photo - https://photos.prnasia.com/prnh/20180919/2241931-1

SOURCE BKKBN