A teenager survived 49 days adrift on a boat in the Pacific Ocean.

Aldi Novel Adilang, 19, had been adrift since mid-July and was headed toward Guam on a boat without an engine or paddles.

The teen thought he was going to die, but remembered his parents and the Bible in times of stress.

He subsisted on fish from the ocean and by filtering seawater through a cloth.

He was rescued at the end of August.

After nearly two months adrift on the Pacific Ocean, a teen from Manado, Indonesia, has returned ashore, Newsweek reported.

On July 14, 19-year-old Aldi Novel Adilang was working as a lamp keeper on a rompong — a solo fishing boat meant to attract fish — about 80 miles from the coast of Indonesia when the vessel was sent adrift, according to a press release from the Indonesian Consulate in Osaka, Japan.

Adilang spent the next 49 days on the open waters, headed toward Guam on a boat without an engine or paddles, according to the release.

After a few days, the teen ran out of supplies. He subsisted on fish from the ocean, which he cooked in the shelter on his boat, and seawater that he filtered through the cloth of his shirt.

"Aldi said he had been scared and often cried while adrift," Indonesian diplomat Fajar Firdaus told the Jakarta Post. "Every time he saw a large ship, he said, he was hopeful, but more than 10 ships had sailed past him; none of them stopped or saw Aldi."

The teen thought he was going to die and, at times, considered jumping into the ocean. But in those moments, he remembered his parents and read the Bible, which he kept aboard the ship.

During his seven weeks at sea, the teen tried at least 10 times to flag larger ships to no avail, according to the Jakarta Post. But on August 31, Adilang successfully flagged down a tanker with Panamanian flags by waving his cloth for help. The teen jumped off his boat, swam in the ocean, and climbed aboard the Arpeggio.

On September 8, Adilang returned to Indonesia and was reunited with his family, according to the Indonesian Consulate. He is in good health.

Visit INSIDER's homepage for more.