Agoda releases findings from its global 'Solo Travel Trends 2018' research

SINGAPORE, Sept. 30, 2018 /PRNewswire/ -- With longer working hours, constant digital contact and increasing obligations, it's no wonder more people are treating themselves to solo trips to (temporarily) get away from it all! According to a survey by Agoda, one of the world's fastest-growing online travel agents (OTA), travelers are choosing to go solo to take respite from the stresses of modern living.

Agoda's 'Solo Travel Trends 2018' survey, conducted by YouGov, found that relaxation and time to unwind is the number one motivator for solo leisure travel globally (61%), which compares to 48% when traveling with friends. Solo travelers surveyed also ranked getting away from routine (52%) and exploring new cultures (45%) as top motivators.

Age gap between Asian and Western solo travelers

Interestingly, Asian solo travelers are more likely to be younger -- Millennials (41%) and Generation Zers (38%) -- while in the West, solo travel is more prevalent among Baby Boomers (39%) and Generation Xers (24%).

Western solo travelers are more likely to indulge in solo travel for longer periods, more often taking trips for 4-7 nights (34%). In addition, Western solo travelers are twice as likely to go on trips of 14 nights or more (20% versus 10%). The Millennial and Generation Z Asian solo traveler tend to take shorter 1-3 night solo trips (46%).

Trend towards more screen time

Unsurprisingly, solo leisure travelers spend more time in front of their laptops and phones than any other traveler type -- two hours a day (119 minutes), which compares to 15% more time than when travelers are with friends (100 minutes) and 26% more time than if they are with family (86 minutes).

Asian solo travelers are the most digitally connected and are more than two times as likely to spend four or more hours a day in front of their screens than their Western peers (31% versus 12%).

Cosmopolitan destinations dominate the charts

Whether for business, leisure or 'bleisure' (a combination of business and leisure travel), independent solo travelers are all heading to cosmopolitan cities around the world. According to Agoda's booking data, Bangkok (Thailand) is the top destination for Asian solo travelers this year, while London (United Kingdom) is number one for Western solo travelers. Both cities have a lot of attractions to keep any solo traveler busy, from shopping and nightlife to culture and dining.

Tokyo (Japan) is a popular choice for both Asian and Western travelers, hitting the top three for both groups. With various food, culture and accommodation options, from capsule hotels to homes and luxury 5-star retreats, the city has a lot on offer for every kind of solo traveler.

2018 top solo travel destinations Rank Asian Travelers Western Travelers 1 Bangkok, Thailand London, United Kingdom 2 Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia Tokyo, Japan 3 Tokyo, Japan Sydney, Australia 4 Singapore Melbourne, Australia 5 Hong Kong New York (NY), United States 6 Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam Bangkok, Thailand 7 Manila, Philippines Los Angeles (CA), United States 8 Bali, Indonesia Las Vegas (NV), United States 9 Jakarta, Indonesia Singapore 10 Chiang Mai, Thailand Paris, France

Head to www.agoda.com/gosolo to book your own solo adventure!

Notes to Editors:

Survey Methodology: The Agoda 'Family Travel Trends 2018' research was conducted by independent market research firm, YouGov between June 19th and 25th 2018. 10,784 respondents were interviewed online and are representative of those who have been on holiday at least once in the past year in each of the following countries: UK, US, Australia, Singapore, Malaysia, Philippines, Indonesia, Vietnam, Thailand and China.

Agoda booking data was collated from January 2018 to September 2018.

'Asian' is defined as China, Philippines, Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore, Thailand, Vietnam. 'Western' is defined as United Kingdom, United States, and Australia.

'Generation Z' are defined as aged 18-25, 'Millennials' aged 26-38, 'Generation X' aged 39-58, 'Baby Boomers & Older' aged 59+.

Logo - https://photos.prnasia.com/prnh/20180212/2053750-1LOGO

SOURCE Agoda