The copper producers hope for bail out still alive after presentation of estimates of revenues and expenditures based on new mining tax regime

A delegation led by Zambia’s Ministry of Finance Margaret Mwanakatwe will date the International Monetary Fund – IMF at the spring meetings in Bali, Indonesia next week. Mwanakatwe is expected to discuss with officials on the sidelines of the spring meetings on issues relating to public debt. The southern African nation has been in constant engagement with the Washington based lender for over 2 years on a possible bailout package to address the copper producers balance of payment imbalances.

The spring meetings commence barely 10 days after Mwanakatwe’ s debut budget which has been dubbed by many stakeholders as bold.

Following presentation of an USD8.6-billion budget to law makers, Mwanakatwe proposed a new mining tax regime that included abolishing a value added tax to be replaced by sales tax, a 1.5% upward adjustment across the bracket of mineral royalty taxes and various import and export duties to shoal revenues earnings for the state. The 2019 budget is believed to be aligned to the austerity drive, Africa’s second largest copper producer, is perusing. An IMF mission team is expected in the country in November this year.

The Annual Meetings of the Boards of Governors of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank Group (WBG) bring together central bankers, ministers of finance and development, parliamentarians, private sector executives, representatives from civil society organizations and academics to discuss issues of global concern, including the world economic outlook, poverty eradication, economic development, and aid effectiveness. Also featured are seminars, regional briefings, press conferences, and many other events focused on the global economy, international development, and the world’s financial system. This year’s events will take place in Nusa Dua, Bali, Indonesia, October 8-14, 2018.

More articles on Zambia