HanesBrands is donating more than $2 million worth of underwear, socks and T-shirts to victims of Hurricane Florence in the Southeast. (Graphic: Business Wire)

HanesBrands is donating more than $2 million worth of underwear, socks and T-shirts to victims of Hurricane Florence in the Southeast. (Graphic: Business Wire)

WINSTON-SALEM, N.C.--(BUSINESS WIRE)--HanesBrands announced today that it is donating nearly 350,000 pairs of underwear, socks and T-shirts to assist victims of flooding from Hurricane Florence in the Carolinas and the Southeast.

Hanes is partnering with nonprofit charity Delivering Good to distribute essential basic apparel valued at more than $2 million to storm and flood victims who have endured relocation, lost homes, power outages and other hardships in wake of the hurricane and associated flooding.

“HanesBrands and its employees are longtime supporters of those in need in the aftermath of natural disasters here and around the world,” said Chris Fox, HanesBrands vice president of corporate social responsibility. “We know that victims of natural disasters have a tremendous need for the basics in life, including shelter, food, water and clothing. We are happy that we can assist in the long road to recovery after Hurricane Florence.”

The Hanes, Champion, Maidenform, and Playtex apparel is being shipped from the company’s distribution centers in Gastonia, Kings Mountain, Rural Hall and Winston-Salem, North Carolina, and near Martinsville, Virginia.

Delivering Good, a 501(c)(3) nonprofit relief charity that helps the apparel industry aid those in need, will arrange for the apparel donated by HanesBrands to go to the following relief agencies in Georgia, North Carolina and South Carolina:

Georgia: Caring for Others, Atlanta.

North Carolina: Fayetteville mayor’s office and Second Harvest Foodbank of Metrolina, Charlotte.

South Carolina: Aid Unlimited, Fort Mill.

In the past decade, HanesBrands has donated more than 5 million items of clothing under its Hanes For Good corporate social responsibility philanthropy efforts to assist natural disaster victims in the United States, Puerto Rico, the Dominican Republic, Haiti, Japan and elsewhere.

For those who want to help Delivering Good in its relief efforts by donating new apparel or cash, go to www.delivering-good.org/disaster-relief/. Every $10 donated enables Delivering Good to distribute more than $100 of new product to relief agencies serving those in need.

HanesBrands

HanesBrands is a socially responsible leading marketer of everyday basic innerwear and activewear apparel in the Americas, Europe, Australia and Asia-Pacific. The company markets T-shirts, bras, panties, shapewear, underwear, socks, hosiery, and activewear under some of the world’s strongest apparel brands, including Hanes, Champion, Maidenform, DIM, Bali, Playtex, Bonds, JMS/Just My Size, Nur Die/Nur Der, L’eggs, Lovable, Wonderbra, Berlei, Alternative, Gear for Sports, and Bras N Things. More information about the company and its award-winning corporate social responsibility initiatives may be found at www.Hanes.com/corporate. Visit our newsroom at https://newsroom.hanesbrands.com/. Connect with HanesBrands via social media on Twitter (@HanesBrands) and Facebook (www.facebook.com/hanesbrandsinc).

Delivering Good

Delivering Good, Inc. (formerly K.I.D.S./Fashion Delivers) is a 501(c)(3) nonprofit, and the charity of choice for new product donations made by hundreds of companies in the fashion, home and children’s industries. Donating new merchandise provides these companies with a simple and effective way to help millions of kids, adults and families facing poverty and disaster each year. Since 1985, over $1.8 billion of donated product has been distributed through our network of community partners. Learn more at www.Delivering-Good.org.