JAKARTA, Indonesia, Oct. 10, 2018 /PRNewswire/ -- Realme, the smartphone brand that specializes in providing high quality smartphones at affordable prices, today officially expanded their business into Southeast Asia by launching their range of smartphones that integrate strong performance and stylish designs, in Indonesia. With the tagline, 'Proud to Be Young', the Realme 2 & Realme 2Pro Series are set to be the new choice smartphones for the younger generation in Indonesia and Southeast Asia.

Established in May 2018, Realme is committed to bringing performance and design that the younger generation needs from a smartphone. Not only do they use smartphones as a communication device, but they also use it to socialize, work and study. The design of the smartphone itself can also describe their personalities. They may have different smartphone habits and aesthetic views, but their demands are similar in terms of what they need from one. Realme is focusing on providing smartphones of the future that offer strong performance and modern designs, at affordable prices.

According to Josef Wang, Marketing Director of Realme Southeast Asia, the launch of Realme in Indonesia begins a new chapter for the brand to become a game changer in the global smartphone industry. "By bringing the 'Proud to be Young' spirit, Realme is ready to eliminate boundaries and set new quality standards in the Indonesian smartphone industry. We define it as 'Power Meets Style' - Realme is focused on bridging the gap by providing products with the latest innovations along with strong performances and stylish designs. As Realme is targeting the global market, we aspire to inject fresh momentum into the global smartphone industry," Wang said.

"By embodying the 'Proud to be Young' spirit, Realme is ready to explore new territories, overcome boundaries and set a new standard of quality in the smartphone industry by integrating strong performances and trendy designs that successfully inspire and attract millions of users. 'Designing for Young People' is not only a statement, but also proven in all Realme products that allow every user from the younger generation around the world to explore unlimited possibilities," he added.

Realme expanded their strategy in Indonesia after succeeding in strengthening their strategy globally. This was achieved through partnerships with key industry leaders such as Qualcomm and Lazada.

To allow users to explore unlimited possibilities, Realme smartphones are equipped with powerful chipset processers from Qualcomm that help to boost the technology. Being leaders in System on Chip, Qualcomm's partnership with Realme is dedicated in offering the most immersive and connected mobile user experiences for best-in-class performances.

"Through the Realme Series, users can experience high-tier mobile processors that are designed for maximum performance, efficiency and versatility, encapsulated in a superior smartphone performance," said Mantosh Malhotra VP & President, Southeast Asia, Qualcomm Technologies, Incorporated

In order to connect with their target audiences, Realme is also collaborating with Lazada Indonesia,which holds one of the biggest customer databases in the region. Their being the leading e-commerce platform in Southeast Asia, including Indonesia, will help connect Realme with 560 million customers, and the rapidly growing number of younger generation in Southeast Asia and Indonesia.

Robin Mah, Chief Business Officer of Lazada Group said, "We are excited to partner with Realme in bringing customers the technology of the future that integrates intelligence, strong performance, and stylish designs. Through our exclusive partnership with Lazada, customers will be able to access Realme's latest products, conveniently, and at attractive prices. In fact, today, we are looking to delight consumers with the launch of the Realme 2 series exclusively on Lazada."

Realme also understands that the younger generation of today has high expectations for gaming. Thus, it has collaborated with the Arena of Valor (AOV), an online multiplayer game that is currently trending among mobile gamers in Indonesia. Through this collaboration, Realme hopes that it can fulfil what the youth needs from the mobile gaming industry.

According to IDC's Quarterly Mobile Phone Tracker report, smartphone shipments in Indonesia for Q42017 reached 7.8 million units with a total annual shipment of 30.4 million units. Currently, the highest number of Indonesian smartphone users consist of millennials, who are aged 15-35 years old.

About Realme

Realme is a technology brand that specializes in providing high quality smartphones. Realme is an emerging smartphone brand. The brand was officially established on May 4th, 2018 (National Youth Day of China) by its founder Sky Li together with a bunch of young people who have rich experience in the smartphone industry across countries.

Realme focuses on user needs and presents products with both strong performance and trendy design in the broad context of e-commerce.

The Realme 1 won wide recognition for its "Power" and "Style" immediately after the launch in India in May 2018. It soared to second place in India's online smartphone market by virtue of its monthly sales volume.

Realme is committed to offering powerful performance, stylish design, sincere services and exploring more possibilities of smartphones.

Photo - https://photos.prnasia.com/prnh/20181009/2262284-1



SOURCE Realme