caption A stock image of a Lion Air plane. source http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/File:Boeing_737-900ER_Lion_Air_Spijkers.jpg

Rescuers searching for the Lion Air plane that crashed into the Java Sea said most of the bodies of the 189 people who were on board are likely trapped inside the wreckage.

Indonesia’s navy said they found a 22-meter part of what they think is the plane after picking up a transponder signal on Tuesday night.

The 40-meter-long Boeing 737 Max 8 crashed after leaving Jakarta’s Soekarno-Hatta International Airport on Monday. All 189 people who were on board are feared dead.

Most of the bodies of the 189 people who died in the Lion Air Flight 610 plane crash on Monday are likely trapped at the bottom of the ocean by wreckage, the Indonesian National Search and Rescue Agency said.

Most bodies were probably “trapped inside the fuselage of the plane in the seabed” of the Java Sea, according to a report from Bloomberg citing the agency’s director of operations, Bambang Suryo Aji, speaking to reporters in Jakarta, Indonesia.

Read more: What we know about the victims of the Lion Air plane crash off Indonesia, where there were ‘likely no survivors’

Rescuers have recovered 49 body bags of human remains and given them to investigators, CNN reported.

The body bags may not contain complete human bodies, as Reuters reported individual body parts were found by rescue teams after the crash on Monday.

caption Shoes of passengers of Lion Air Flight 610 at Tanjung Priok port in Jakarta, Indonesia. source Reuters

It came after the Indonesian navy located a large object on the seabed, which they think is a large chunk of fuselage from Flight 610.

Experts found a 22-meter-long object that they think is part of the 40-meter-long Boeing 737 Max 8, the Associated Press reported.

Navy officer Haris Djoko Nugroho said in a television interview on Wednesday, “There are some small objects that we found, but last night, thank God, we found a large enough object.”

Lion Air planes have encountered technical problems before – the same aircraft that crashed on Monday had problems on its last fight, during which the plane rose and fell several times after takeoff, according to passengers.

Boeing’s share price fell as a result of Monday’s crash.

Officials have said all 189 people who were on board are likely dead.